---
layout: feed_item
title: "A coal-fired plant in Michigan was supposed to close. But Trump forced it to keep running at $1M a day."
date: 2025-08-23 13:00:00 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['wind-power', 'fossil-fuels', 'urgent', 'renewable-energy', 'climate-costs', 'solar-power', 'economic-impacts', 'climate-health', 'clean-energy', 'year-2028']
keywords: ['wind-power', 'fossil-fuels', 'urgent', 'plant', 'fired', 'coal', 'climate-costs', 'renewable-energy']
description: "Donald Trump has made several unusual moves to elongate the era of coal, such as giving the industry exemptions from pollution rules"
external_url: https://grist.org/energy/a-coal-fired-plant-in-michigan-was-supposed-to-close-but-trump-forced-it-to-keep-running-at-1m-a-day/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Grist"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Donald Trump has made several unusual moves to elongate the era of coal, such as giving the industry exemptions from pollution rules. But the gambit to keep one Michigan coal-fired power station running has been extraordinary — by forcing it to remain open even against the wishes of its operator. The hulking&nbsp;JH Campbell power plant, which since 1962 has sat a few hundred yards from the sand dunes at the edge of Lake Michigan, was just eight days away from a long-planned closure in May when Trump’s Department of Energy issued an emergency order that it remain open for a further 90 days. On Wednesday, the administration intervened again to extend this order even further, prolonging the lifetime of the coal plant another 90 days, meaning it will keep running until November — six months after it was due to close. The move, taken under emergency powers more normally used during wartime or in the wake of disaster, has stunned local residents and the plant’s operator, Consumers&nbsp;Energy. “My family had a countdown for it closing, we couldn’t wait,” said Mark Oppenhuizen, who has lived in the shadow of the plant for 30 years and suspects its pollution worsened his wife’s lung disease. “I was flabbergasted when the administration said they had stopped it shutting down,” he said. “Why are they inserting themselves into a decision a company has made? Just because politically you don’t like it? It’s all so dumb.” The May 23 order and the latest edict, by the U.S. energy secretary, Chris Wright, both warn that the regional grid would be strained by the closure of JH Campbell with local homes and businesses at risk of “curtailments or outages, presenting a risk to public health and safety” without it. Read Next Trump is fast-tracking new coal mines — even when they don’t make economic sense Katie Myers “This order will help ensure millions of Americans can continue to access affordable, reliable, and secure baseload power regardless of whether the wind is blowing or the sun is shining,” Wright said in a statement on Thursday. But&nbsp;Miso, the grid operator for Michigan and 14 other states, has stressed it has had “adequate resources to meet peak demand this summer” without JH Campbell and Consumers Energy had already set about making plans for life after its last remaining coal plant. “What’s remarkable is that this is the first time the energy secretary has used these powers without being asked to do so by the market operator or power plant operator,” said Timothy Fox, an energy analyst at ClearView. “It shows the&nbsp;Trump administration&nbsp;is prepared to take muscular actions to keep its preferred power sources online.” Wright — whose department has bizarrely taken to tweeting pictures of lumps of coal with the words “She’s an icon. She’s a legend” — has said the U.S. “has got to stop closing coal plants” to help boost electricity generation to meet demand that is escalating due to the growth of artificial intelligence. The administration has also issued a separate emergency declaration to keep open a gas plant in Pennsylvania, although it has sought to kill off wind and solar projects, which Trump has called “ugly” and “disgusting.” The president, who solicited and received major donations from coal, oil, and gas interests during his election campaign, has signed an executive order aimed at reviving what he calls “beautiful, clean coal” and took the remarkable step of asking fossil fuel companies to email requests to be exempt from pollution laws, again under emergency powers. So far, 71 coal plants, along with dozens of other chemical, copper smelting, and other polluting facilities, have received “pollution passes” from the Trump administration according to a tally by the Environmental Defense Fund, allowing greater emissions of airborne toxins linked to an array of health problems. Coal is, despite Trump’s claims, the dirtiest of all fossil fuels and the leading source of planet-heating pollution. Read Next Offshore wind leasing is officially dead under Trump Clare Fieseler, Canary Media Trump has launched a “political takeover of the electricity grid” to favor fossil fuels, according to Caroline Reiser, an attorney at the Natural Resources Defense Council. “The result of this will be higher electricity bills, more pollution in our communities, and a worsening climate crisis,” she added. In Michigan, the cost of keeping JH Campbell open is set to be steep. Consumers Energy initially estimated its closure would save ratepayers $600 million by 2040 as it shifts to cheaper, cleaner energy sources such as solar and wind. Reversing this decision costs $1 million a day in operating costs, an imposition that Midwest residents will have to meet through their bills. It is understood the company privately told outside groups it fears the administration could keep adding 90-day emergency orders for the entire remainder of Trump’s term. “Consumers Energy continues to comply with the [Department of Energy] order and will do so as long as it is in effect,” a company spokesperson said. “We are pursuing recovery of the costs of running the Campbell plant in a proceeding currently before [the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission]. Timely cost recovery is essential.” Should the Trump administration go further and force all of the U.S .fossil fuel plants set to retire by 2028 to continue operating, it will cost American ratepayers as much as $6 billion a year in extra bills, a new report by a coalition of green groups has found. This would almost certainly be met by legal action — Dana Nessel, Michigan’s attorney general, has already filed a lawsuit arguing the “arbitrary and illegal order” to extend JH Campbell’s lifespan will unfairly heap costs upon households in the state. Trump’s efforts may bear some fruit, with U.S. coal production expected to tick up slightly this year, although the longer-term trend for coal is one of decline amid cheaper gas and renewables. “The administration may slow the retirement trend although they are unlikely to stop it,” said ClearView’s Fox. “The economics don’t change, but the administration could be a savior for these plants at least while Donald Trump is in office.” Read Next A hidden fuel source beneath the Midwest? Scientists are investigating. Rebecca Egan McCarthy For those living next to and downwind of coal plants, there is a cost to be paid that isn’t just monetary. Tiny soot particles from burned coal can bury themselves deep into the lungs, causing potentially deadly respiratory and heart problems. The closure of such plants can lift this burden dramatically — a recent study found that in the month after a coal facility was closed near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, in 2016, the number of childhood asthma visits to local hospitals declined by 41 percent and then continued to fall by about 4 percent each month. The study shows “the closure of a major industrial pollution source can lead to immediate and lasting improvements in the lung health of the those who live nearby,” said Wuyue Yu, research co-author and postdoctoral fellow at the NYU Grossman School of Medicine. For those living in the township of Port Sheldon, a mostly bucolic setting on the shore of the vast Lake Michigan, a pollution-free future beckoned once JH Campbell had been scheduled to close, with lofty plans for new parkland, housing and a battery plant touted for the site. Now there is uncertainty. Last week, a few dozen residents and activists held a protest event next to the sprawling plant, which hummed and whirred in the summer heat, one 650-foot chimney puncturing the horizon, another, smaller flue striped red and white, like a candy cane. Dozens of train cars full of coal, hastily procured after the plant’s supply was used up ahead of a closure that has been scheduled for four years, backed up in the sunshine. When burned in the huge 1.5 gigawatt plant, this coal emits about 7.7 million tons of carbon dioxide a year. “Trump is just trying to keep the money coming into coal companies as long as he can, I suppose,” said David Hoekema, who has lived a couple of miles from the plant since 2006 and has had to clean coal dust from his windows. Trump&nbsp;easily won&nbsp;this county, called Ottawa, in last year’s election, but Hoekema said even his staunchest conservative neighbors don’t want the coal plant. “I’ve not met anyone along the lake shore who says, ‘Oh yeah, let’s keep this open’ — even the conservative Republicans are concerned about their health,” he said. “Republican ideology says local control is best, but the Trump administration is saying, ‘We don’t care what the hell states do, we will impose our order on them.’ I know there’s a lot of competition, but this would have to be one of their craziest decisions.” The Department of Energy did not respond to questions about its plan for JH Campbell once its latest extension expires. The battle over the coal plant’s future has taken place to a backdrop of a scorching summer in Michigan, one of its hottest on&nbsp;record, with algal blooms&nbsp;sprouting&nbsp;in its lakes, both symptoms of an unfolding&nbsp;climate crisis. “The talk in neighborhoods has been how hot it’s been this summer — my kid was prepared to be outside every day and it’s been so hot so often it’s been irresponsible to do that,” said Stephen Wooden, a Democratic state lawmaker who added that Michigan residents are also “pissed off” about increasing power bills. “We’re seeing the impacts of climate change daily, it is impacting our state,” Wooden said. “And this is being caused by the continuation of outdated, expensive fossil fuels that&nbsp;Donald Trump&nbsp;wants to prop up.” &nbsp;This story was originally published by Grist with the headline A coal-fired plant in Michigan was supposed to close. But Trump forced it to keep running at $1M a day. on Aug 23, 2025.

[Read original article](https://grist.org/energy/a-coal-fired-plant-in-michigan-was-supposed-to-close-but-trump-forced-it-to-keep-running-at-1m-a-day/)
