---
layout: feed_item
title: "Chart: UK misses tree-planting targets by forest the ‘size of Isle of Wight’"
date: 2025-07-02 12:45:09 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['year-2025', 'urgent']
keywords: ['year-2025', 'tree', 'chart', 'misses', 'urgent']
description: "This is roughly half the annual target of 30,000 hectares by 2025 that was set by the previous Conservative government"
external_url: https://www.carbonbrief.org/chart-uk-misses-tree-planting-targets-by-forest-the-size-of-isle-of-wight/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Carbon Brief"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

A forest area equivalent to the size of the Isle of Wight has not been planted because UK governments have failed to meet tree-planting goals since 2020, according to Carbon Brief analysis. The latest figures from Forest Research show that only 15,700 hectares of trees were planted across England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland over the past year. This is roughly half the annual target of 30,000 hectares by 2025 that was set by the previous Conservative government. After the 2019 general election, the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) laid out a planned trajectory for England from 2020 up to 2025. Tree-planting is a devolved issue, so Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have had their own annual targets. The chart below shows how, collectively, the nations have repeatedly missed these goals. The cumulative impact of missed tree-planting targets over the past five years adds up to 36,429 hectares of unplanted forest, equal to nearly the size of the Isle of Wight.&nbsp; This gap has grown since last year, when Carbon Brief analysis showed that the missed targets equated to a 22,129-hectare – or “Birmingham-sized” – forest. UK-wide tree-planting compared to the combined annual goals set out by Scotland, England, Wales and Northern Ireland. Source: Forest Research, targets set for Scotland, England, Wales and Northern Ireland. As the location of most UK tree-planting, Scotland has also been the biggest contributor to the shortfall. Shortly before the latest figures were released, government advisors at the Climate Change Committee (CCC) pointed to the UK&#8217;s “highest planting rate in two decades” in 2023-24. However, it noted its “concerns that recent reductions in funding for woodland creation in Scotland could reverse this trend”.&nbsp; As the CCC predicted, just 8,470 hectares of trees were planted in Scotland in 2024-25, down from 15,040 hectares the previous year.&nbsp; The nation had been targeting 18,000 hectares of annual woodland creation that year, although this was scaled back to 10,000 at the end of 2024 following a 41% cut to forestry grants. Tree-planting rates across the other nations have steadily increased, but they have still not been on track to achieve their internal goals. While the 30,000-hectare goal has not been formally abandoned, Labour did not mention it ahead of their election win last year.&nbsp; Instead, the new government only committed to “establish[ing] three new national forests in England, whilst planting millions of trees and creating new woodlands”.&nbsp; (Since winning the election, Labour has announced a tree-planting “taskforce”, in part to help meet a legally binding target of raising England’s tree cover to 16.5% by 2050.) This followed repeated warnings from industry sources and independent analysts, over the course of the previous government, that the 30,000-hectare target was slipping out of reach. Nevertheless, the CCC urged the new Labour government last year to move quickly to meet the goal. Earlier in 2025, the committee said it remains “vital” that tree-planting more than doubles to 37,000 hectares per year by 2030 to remain on track for the UK’s net-zero target. Such rates are necessary because trees are needed to absorb carbon dioxide (CO2) and balance out remaining emissions from sectors that are not able to completely decarbonise by the 2050 net-zero date, the CCC says. Around two-thirds of the trees planted last year were broadleaves rather than conifers, which grow faster and, therefore, absorb more CO2 in the short term. This is likely due to the decline in tree-planting across Scotland, which is home to most of the UK’s commercial conifer plantations. Methodology This article is an update of Carbon Brief analysis published ahead of the general election last year, which assessed progress towards tree-planting goals in the UK and the devolved administrations. During the 2019 election campaign, the Conservatives committed to a UK-wide goal of creating 30,000 hectares of new woodland a year by the end of parliament, which was pegged for 2024-25. (Annual tree-planting figures are reported for the period between 1 April in one year and 31 March in the following year.) Within this, England had a planned trajectory set out by Defra, Scotland had annual tree-planting goals, Wales targeted “at least” 2,000 hectares a year from 2020 and Northern Ireland set out annual goals in its “forest service business plans”. For the final year, Carbon Brief compared the 2024-25 tree-planting rates recorded in Forest Research data to the overall UK-wide target of 30,000 hectares. For the previous four years, the comparison is with the combined annual targets set by the devolved administrations. The Carbon Brief Interview: Ofgem CEO Jonathan Brearley Interviews | 30.06.25 Analysis: UK climate aid to hit £11.6bn goal – but only due to accounting rule change UK policy | 30.06.25 Bonn climate talks: Key outcomes from the June 2025 UN climate conference Policy | 27.06.25 CCC: UK climate advisers now ‘more optimistic’ net-zero goals can be met UK policy | 25.06.25 The post Chart: UK misses tree-planting targets by forest the ‘size of Isle of Wight’ appeared first on Carbon Brief.

[Read original article](https://www.carbonbrief.org/chart-uk-misses-tree-planting-targets-by-forest-the-size-of-isle-of-wight/)
