---
layout: feed_item
title: "IPCC seeks experts to review the first draft of the Special Report on Climate Change and Cities"
date: 2025-09-17 13:10:55 +0000
categories: [climate_science]
tags: ['cop28', 'ccs', 'climate-science', 'carbon-capture', 'ipcc', 'year-2027', 'urgent', 'climate-summit']
keywords: ['cop28', 'ccs', 'climate-science', 'carbon-capture', 'ipcc', 'experts', 'seeks']
description: "The review of the First Order Draft is the first of multiple review stages foreseen for every IPCC report"
external_url: https://www.ipcc.ch/2025/09/17/prfod1225/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "IPCC"
feed_category: "climate_science"
---

GENEVA, September 17 – The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) opened today the registration for experts to serve as Expert Reviewers on the First-Order Draft (FOD) of the Special Report on Climate Change and Cities. Following the Second Lead Author Meeting this August, authors of this Special Report have prepared a first draft, which will be open in a month for experts worldwide to review and provide comments. The review of the First Order Draft is the first of multiple review stages foreseen for every IPCC report. The review process is critical in preparing IPCC reports, as it helps ensure scientific rigour, the widest range of perspectives, and relevance to the urgent challenges urban areas and communities face in a warming world and changing climate. Scheduled for release in March 2027, the Special Report on Climate Change and Cities will be the first IPCC report published in the seventh assessment cycle. It is also the only special report in the current cycle. &nbsp;The report aims to provide a timely assessment of the latest science related to climate change and cities, including climate impacts and risks, as well as adaptation and mitigation options.&nbsp; This review is the first opportunity for experts to engage with the draft text of the Special Report. All review comments submitted by experts or governments are addressed by the authors. The comments and the author responses, together with the drafts, are published after the report is finalised. “Our team of around 100 authors have dedicated their time and expertise to develop a meaningful and holistic first draft of the Special Report. We sincerely invite members of the urban community to come forward to provide comments to ensure this report will reflect the latest science and be relevant to the work of urban practitioners around the world,” said Winston Chow, Co-Chair of Working Group II. “We want to hear the voices of experts from around the world, as we know that city contexts differ worldwide. Expert reviews are critical touchpoints with the global community. They allow authors to consider diverse perspectives and listen to local realities,” said Bart van den Hurk, Co-Chair of Working Group II. Interested experts can register for participation in the review here. The registration of experts closes on 30 November 2025. The FOD of the IPCC Special Report on Climate Change and Cities is available for Expert Review from 17 October to 12 December 2025. For more information about the Expert Review, please contact Woo Qiyun, Senior Communications Manager, IPCC Working Group II Technical Support Unit, media@ipccwg2.org. More information about IPCC review processes For more information about IPCC and its processes, please contact: &nbsp;IPCC Press Office, Email: ipcc-media@wmo.int Notes for Editors What is the IPCC? The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is the UN body for assessing the science related to climate change. It was established by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) in 1988 to provide political leaders with periodic scientific assessments concerning climate change, its implications and risks, as well as to put forward adaptation and mitigation strategies. In the same year the UN General Assembly endorsed the action by the WMO and UNEP in jointly establishing the IPCC. It has 195 member states. Thousands of people from all over the world contribute to the work of the IPCC. For the assessment reports, scientists and experts volunteer their time as IPCC authors to assess the thousands of scientific papers published each year to provide a comprehensive summary of what is known about the drivers of climate change, its impacts and future risks, and how adaptation and mitigation can reduce those risks. The IPCC has three working groups: Working Group I, dealing with the physical science basis of climate change; Working Group II, dealing with impacts, adaptation and vulnerability; and Working Group III, dealing with the mitigation of climate change. It also has a Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories that develops methodologies for measuring emissions and removals. IPCC assessments provide governments, at all levels, with scientific information that they can use to develop climate policies. IPCC assessments are a key input into the international negotiations to tackle climate change. IPCC reports are drafted and reviewed in several stages, thus guaranteeing objectivity and transparency. About the Seventh Assessment Cycle Comprehensive scientific assessment reports are published every 5 to 7 years. The IPCC is currently in its seventh assessment cycle, which formally began in July 2023 with the elections of the new IPCC and Task Force Bureaus at the IPCC’s Plenary Session in Nairobi. At its first Plenary Session in the seventh assessment cycle – the 60th Plenary Session in Istanbul, Türkiye, in January 2024 – the Panel agreed to produce in this cycle the three Working Group contributions to the Seventh Assessment Report (AR7), namely the Working Group I report on the Physical Science Basis, the Working Group II report on Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability and the Working Group III report on Mitigation of Climate Change. The Synthesis Report of the Seventh Assessment Report will be produced after the completion of the Working Group reports and released by late 2029. During its 62nd Plenary Session held in Hangzhou, China, in February 2025, the Panel agreed on the outlines of the three Working Group contributions to the Seventh Assessment Report (AR7). The Panel had already decided during the previous cycle to produce a Special Report on Climate Change and Cities and a Methodology Report on Short-lived Climate Forcers during AR7.. Scientists have also been asked to deliver a Methodology Report on Carbon Dioxide Removal Technologies, Carbon Capture Utilization and Storage. At the IPCC’s&nbsp; 61st Plenary Session held in Sofia, Bulgaria, from 27 July to 2 August 2024, the Panel agreed upon the outlines for the Special Report on Climate Change and Cities scheduled for approval and publication in March 2027 and for the 2027 IPCC Methodology Report on Inventories for Short-lived Climate Forcers scheduled for publication in the second half of 2027. In addition, a revision of the 1994 IPCC Technical Guidelines on impacts and adaptation as well as adaptation indicators, metrics and guidelines, will be developed in conjunction with the Working Group II report and published as a separate product. IPCC’s latest report, the Sixth Assessment Report, was completed in March 2023 with the release of its Synthesis Report, which provided direct scientific input to the First Global Stocktake process under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change at COP28 in Dubai. The Sixth Assessment Report comprises three Working Group contributions and a Synthesis Report. The Working Group I contribution Climate Change 2021: the Physical Science Basis was released on 9 August 2021. The Working Group II contribution, Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability, was released on 28 February 2022. The Working Group III contribution, Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change, was released on 4 April 2022 and the Synthesis Report on 20 March 2023. The Synthesis Report to the Sixth Assessment Report, distils and integrates the findings of the three Working Group assessments as well as the three Special Reports released in 2018 and 2019. The special reports were on Global Warming of 1.5°C (October 2018.), Climate Change and Land (August 2019) and, the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (September 2019). For more information, please visit www.ipcc.ch. The website includes outreach materials including videos about the IPCC and video recordings from outreach events conducted as webinars or live-streamed events. Most videos published by the IPCC can be found on our YouTube channel.&nbsp;

[Read original article](https://www.ipcc.ch/2025/09/17/prfod1225/)
