---
layout: feed_item
title: "Push for global minerals deal meets opposition, more talks agreed"
date: 2025-12-12 13:57:16 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['clean-energy', 'wind-power', 'year-2025', 'renewable-energy', 'solar-power']
keywords: ['clean-energy', 'wind-power', 'year-2025', 'global', 'renewable-energy', 'push', 'minerals', 'solar-power']
description: "It had called for the creation of an expert group to identify options for binding and non-binding international instruments to shape global action"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/12/12/push-for-global-minerals-deal-meets-opposition-more-talks-agreed/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Countries gathered at the UN Environment Assembly (UNEA) this week failed to back a proposal to establish a panel of experts to look at ways to limit the environmental harm caused by mining, agreeing instead to hold more talks on tackling the issue. A draft resolution proposed by Colombia and Oman had sought to make mineral supply chains more transparent and sustainable amid booming demand for the minerals and metals needed to manufacture batteries, electric cars, solar panels and wind turbines as well as digital and military technologies. It had called for the creation of an expert group to identify options for binding and non-binding international instruments to shape global action. But amid divisions among nations and staunch opposition by some governments to any process that could eventually lead to binding instruments, country delegates meeting in Nairobi only agreed to a watered-down proposal to hold &#8220;dialogues&#8221; on &#8220;enhancing international cooperation on [the] sustainable management of minerals and metals&#8221;. Governments also agreed to discuss how to recover minerals from waste, known as tailings, best practices for the sustainable management of minerals and metals, and strengthening the technological, financial and scientific capabilities of developing countries. Dec 4, 2025 Clean Energy Frontier Proposal for global minerals deal meets opposition as China looks away Saudi Arabia, Iran and Russia oppose a UN resolution for nations to start discussing options for a global minerals agreement to reduce the environmental impacts of mining Read more Dec 8, 2025 Comment Mining is destroying our homes: We need global binding rules for mineral extraction Amid a rush for minerals needed for the energy transition, voluntary safeguards and corporate goodwill are insufficient to protect nature and human rights Read more May 26, 2025 Clean Energy Frontier Does the world need a global treaty on energy transition minerals? As countries rush to secure supplies of the materials needed to ramp up clean energy, a push for stronger governance rules is gathering momentum Read more Pedro Cortes, Colombia&#8217;s ambassador to Kenya, told an event on Wednesday that the negotiations had been &#8220;difficult&#8221; but that the agreement will enable governments to continue the discussion. Mauricio Cabrera Leal, Colombia’s former vice minister of environmental policy who initiated work on the proposal last year, told Climate Home News that the outcome was not what he had envisaged but said it was &#8220;good&#8221; in light of the &#8220;hard&#8221; geopolitics at play in Nairobi. Colombia&#8217;s push for a minerals treaty Colombia has called for an international minerals treaty to define rules and standards to make mineral value chains more traceable and sustainable as the world scrambles to boost supplies of materials needed for the energy transition. For resource-rich developing countries, demand for these minerals is an opportunity to diversify their economies, spur development and create jobs. But the extraction and processing of minerals also brings the risk of environmental damage and human rights abuses. Victims of Zambian copper mine disaster demand multibillion dollar payout Ambassador Cortes told an event on the sidelines of the UNEA that more stringent global oversight was needed. &#8220;While various efforts have sought to promote the environmentally sustainable management of mining through voluntary guidelines, national legislations and industry-led initiatives, it is clear that greater international cooperation is needed at this critical moment to elevate ambition and accelerate action,&#8221; he said. &#8220;This action will be essential to balance the growing demand for minerals required for the renewable energy transition with the imperative of ensuring environmental integrity and social sustainability,&#8221; he added. Opposition to binding rules But numerous governments &#8211; including Saudi Arabia, Russia, Iran as well as resource-rich Chile, Peru, Argentina and some African countries such as Uganda &#8211; opposed any discussion of possible binding rules on mineral value chains, several observers with access to the negotiations told Climate Home News. While UNEA resolutions are not legally binding, they can kick off a process towards binding agreements, such as the launch of negotiations on a treaty to end plastics pollution – a process that has since stalled. China, which dominates the processing and refining of minerals and metals, stayed largely quiet during the negotiations. But Nana Zhao, an official from the Chinese delegation, told Climate Home News that China was &#8220;satisfied&#8221; with the wording of the resolution. The UNEA should stay focused on environmental matters and not bring in issues relating to supply chains, she added. The opening plenary of UNEA-7 in Nairobi, Kenya (Photo: IISD/ENB | Anastasia Rodopoulou) An opening for more co-operation Campaigners, who are calling for binding rules to prevent environmental and social harms linked to mineral extraction and processing, expressed disappointment at the agreement but welcomed the prospect of further talks on the issue. &#8220;The initial aim was to start with negotiations for [a] binding treaty and to get countries together to start talking about joint rules,&#8221; Johanna Sydow, a resource policy expert who heads the international environmental policy division of Germany’s Heinrich-Böll Foundation, told Climate Home News. The agreement reached in Nairobi is &#8220;very weak&#8221; compared to that initial proposal but it creates the &#8220;foundation to stay in dialogue and try to find solutions and work on something constructively&#8221;, she said. &#8220;This is an opening for more co-operation&#8221;. UN taskforce to deliver equitable supply chains On the sidelines of the assembly, UN agencies launched a taskforce on critical energy transition minerals to coordinate UN activities in building more transparent, sustainable and equitable supply chains. The taskforce will help deliver on recommendations by a panel of experts convened by UN Secretary-General António Guterres which called for putting equity and human rights at the core of mineral value chains. It will be chaired by the UN Environment Programme, UN Trade and Development (UNCTAD) and the UN Development Programme, and draw on expertise across the UN system. Nov 28, 2025 Clean Energy Frontier EU refuses to review &#8220;strategic&#8221; mineral projects for energy transition Brussels says requests by NGOs to reassess the &#8220;strategic&#8221; designation of new mining projects because of environmental concerns are &#8220;unfounded&#8221; Read more Nov 26, 2025 Clean Energy Frontier South Africa’s platinum mine dumps get a second look as clean energy lifts demand Mining firms say extracting minerals from tailings is a sustainable way to boost global supplies, but local communities want to see benefits this time around Read more Oct 9, 2025 Clean Energy Frontier AI and satellite data help researchers map world’s transition minerals rush Filling “mind-boggling” gaps in mining data will make it easier to track the environmental impact of surging global appetite for critical minerals, experts say Read more Inger Andersen, executive director of the United Nations Environment Programme, said the sustainable management of minerals cuts across trade, environment and development. &#8220;Multilateral cooperation and partnerships beyond the UN [are] absolutely essential for us to respond to what we can see is a driving demand and hunger for minerals and metals. But before we have a &#8216;race&#8217; to this, let&#8217;s make sure we look at these aspects that can lead to injustice, environmental harms, biodiversity loss, water pollution and human rights [harms],&#8221; she added. Suneeta Kaimal, president and CEO of the Natural Resource Governance Institute and a member of the UN panel of experts, said the taskforce was &#8220;a timely and necessary step toward making the panel’s ambitions real&#8221;. &#8220;It must work boldly and inclusively with communities and civil society, and it will need political commitment and financial resources &#8211; not only technical efforts &#8211; to drive a just and equitable new paradigm that safeguards people, ecosystems and economies in producer countries,&#8221; she said. The post Push for global minerals deal meets opposition, more talks agreed appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/12/12/push-for-global-minerals-deal-meets-opposition-more-talks-agreed/)
