---
layout: feed_item
title: "COP30 Bulletin Day 9: China and Russia push back on critical minerals mention in draft text"
date: 2025-11-19 19:46:30 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['solar-power', 'rainforest', 'year-2025', 'clean-energy', 'wind-power', 'fossil-fuels', 'renewable-energy', 'emissions', 'amazon']
keywords: ['solar-power', 'rainforest', 'year-2025', 'bulletin', 'clean-energy', 'wind-power', 'russia', 'china']
description: "Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva is in town for a series of high-level meetings, including talks with delegations from the EU and China"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/11/19/cop30-bulletin-day-9-china-and-russia-push-back-on-critical-minerals-mention-in-draft-text/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

After Brazil’s COP30 presidency insisted on its plan to gavel through a political package on some of the most divisive issues at the UN climate talks “very late” on Wednesday, promised new draft texts had yet to materialise by late afternoon. Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva is in town for a series of high-level meetings, including talks with delegations from the EU and China. UN Secretary-General António Guterres is also conducting bilateral engagements on the sidelines. Key sticking points — from trade and finance from developed countries to a proposed roadmap for transitioning away from fossil fuels — remain unresolved. Brazilian negotiators are pushing to bridge divisions in hopes of securing an early win. China and Russia oppose critical minerals in draft Minerals needed for the transition from fossil fuels to clean energy systems made their first appearance in a draft COP text last week. But not everyone is happy about it.&nbsp; Observers at the talks say China has opposed the inclusion of language on minerals in the text on ensuring a just energy transition within and among countries, while one with access to the negotiation rooms told Climate Home News that Russia is also resisting.&nbsp;&nbsp; The current draft text for an area of the negotiations known as the Just Transition Work Programme (JTWP) includes an option to recognise the social and environmental risks from extracting minerals needed to manufacture batteries, solar panels and wind turbines. If adopted it would be the first mention of energy-transition minerals in the UN climate regime. The same option also recalls principles and recommendations outlined by a UN of experts convened by UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres, which suggested that human rights must be “at the core” of mining for transition minerals. Observers say China has been adamant about dropping all references to critical minerals in the COP30 draft. Russia took particular aim at the reference to the UN panel and wants it removed. COP30 draft text includes energy transition minerals in UN&nbsp;climate&nbsp;first To pressure China away from its current position, a group of activists sought to approach China’s second-in-command at COP30, Xia Yingxian, director general of the Department of Climate Change at China&#8217;s Ministry of Ecology and Environment (MEE). After he concluded an appearance in an unrelated event at the WWF pavilion, a group of activists approached Xia to give him a letter “respectfully” calling on&nbsp;China to agree to the inclusion of minerals in the text, arguing that “China’s support would carry significant weight” and signal climate leadership. “The explicit inclusion of critical energy transition minerals is a paramount priority for key delegates and partners across the Global South and developing parties here at COP30,” the letter read.&nbsp; After being offered the letter, Xia rejected the document several times and, after the activists insisted, he sped away towards delegation offices. Activists hand China&#8217;s director general of climate change a letter calling on China to support the inclusion of critical minerals in the COP30 text on just transition on November 19, 2025. (Photo: Sebastian Rodriguez) Activists hand China&#8217;s director general of climate change a letter calling on China to support the inclusion of critical minerals in the COP30 text on just transition on November 19, 2025. (Photo: Sebastian Rodriguez) China is a dominant actor in the transition minerals supply chain, producing more than 70% of the world’s refined lithium, 78% of the world’s refined cobalt and 91% of rare earth minerals, according to the International Energy Agency (IEA). China wants a transition towards renewables Battling the deafening roar of pouring rain in a remote corner of the COP venue, Xia Yingxian, director general of China’s Department of Climate Change, dropped subtle hints on where the country stands on the transition away from fossil fuels. Speaking in English at the WWF pavilion, Yingxian said “we are trying to push for a transition to renewables, transitioning away from fossil fuels…how to make it just, orderly and fair. We understand it’s not easy, but this is the journey we have to go together.” He suggested that, while there has been lots of talk about transitioning away, “such kind of narrative” could be reframed to overcome divisions.&nbsp; How could we promote renewables? Trying to change the tone from negative to positive. This will be more than welcome,” he added. Pressure builds for fossil fuel transition plan at COP30&nbsp; Xia concluded his speech saying that a change in framing to “positive prosperity” could help “unite all of us” and send the message that “we can do it together”. He added the framing should not be about “losing” but “how we can win”. China &#8211; the world’s largest producer of solar and wind technologies &#8211; has so far not publicly voiced a position on calls for a roadmap to transition away from fossil fuels at COP30.&nbsp; Yesterday, more than 80 countries asked that a process to craft a roadmap to shift the world away from oil, coal and gas be agreed as one of the main outcomes from Belém. A worker at Dafeng Power Station, which poduces electricity with solar and wind (Photo credit: Zhiyoung Fu/Greenpeace) A worker at Dafeng Power Station, which poduces electricity with solar and wind (Photo credit: Zhiyoung Fu/Greenpeace) Roadmap to end deforestation lags fossil fuel plan at Amazon COP As countries ramp up pressure for a COP30 decision on a roadmap to transition away from fossil fuels, they have yet to push hard in the Amazon city of Belém for another much-anticipated roadmap to end deforestation. Discussions on both mechanisms took off after Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva told world leaders at the summit’s opening that COP30 must deliver “roadmaps to plan in a fair way the reversal of deforestation, reducing the dependency on fossil fuels and to mobilise the necessary resources to reach these objectives”. Since then, more than 80 countries have rallied behind a fossil fuel transition roadmap – yet negotiators from tropical countries and observers say a roadmap to end deforestation has not gained the same momentum at the UN climate talks. At least 42 countries have expressed support for a deforestation roadmap – among them the European Union, the AILAC group of Latin American countries and the Environmental Integrity Group which includes Mexico, Liechtenstein, Monaco, South Korea, Switzerland and Georgia. World failing on goal to halt deforestation by 2030, raising stakes for Amazon COP Current negotiating drafts include an option to convene a dialogue of ministers on the creation of national roadmaps to end deforestation, which observers told Climate Home News is a weak option that must be improved with more pressure from countries. Panama’s head of delegation Juan Carlos Monterrey told an event hosted by Climate Home News this week that a plan to protect forests has to be one of the key outcomes of COP30. “If we don’t get a roadmap to end deforestation at the Amazonia COP, we will never get it,” he said. Read the full story here. The post COP30 Bulletin Day 9: China and Russia push back on critical minerals mention in draft text appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/11/19/cop30-bulletin-day-9-china-and-russia-push-back-on-critical-minerals-mention-in-draft-text/)
