---
layout: feed_item
title: "Fossil-fuelled heat has caused tropical birds to decline by ‘up to 38%’ since 1950s"
date: 2025-08-11 15:01:04 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['oceania', 'ice-loss', 'drought', 'year-2025', 'australia', 'glaciers', 'heatwave', 'amazon', 'rainforest', 'water-crisis']
keywords: ['oceania', 'ice-loss', 'drought', 'year-2025', 'fuelled', 'australia', 'heat', 'fossil']
description: "The study combines ecological and climate attribution techniques to trace the fingerprint of fossil-fuelled climate change on declining wildlife populations"
external_url: https://www.carbonbrief.org/fossil-fuelled-heat-has-caused-tropical-birds-to-decline-by-up-to-38-since-1950s/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Carbon Brief"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

An uptick in heat extremes, driven by human-caused climate change, has caused tropical bird populations to decline by up to 38% since the 1950s, according to a first-of-its-kind analysis. The study combines ecological and climate attribution techniques to trace the fingerprint of fossil-fuelled climate change on declining wildlife populations. It shows that an increase in heat extremes driven by climate change has caused tropical bird populations to decline by 25-38% in the period 1950-2020, when compared to a world without warming. The findings could help to explain why tropical bird numbers have declined even in pristine rainforests, a phenomenon that previously mystified biologists, the scientists say. ‘Chance encounter’ Over the past few decades, an emerging field of science known as “climate attribution” has used a standardised set of techniques to trace the fingerprint of human-caused warming on different elements of the climate system, ranging from worsening extreme weather events to episodes of glacier melt. The new research, published in Nature Ecology and Evolution, is the first to use climate attribution techniques to detect the fingerprint of climate change on declining wildlife populations. The study came about following a “chance encounter” between lead author Dr Maximilian Kotz, a climate scientist at the Barcelona Supercomputing Center in Spain, and his co-authors, who are biodiversity experts at the University of Queensland in Australia, while Kotz was completing a research stay in Australia. Kotz says to Carbon Brief: “As far as we are aware, this is the first animal climate attribution study.” The researchers decided to focus on birds, rather than other animal species, as they have the “best available data, covering a good range of different species and geographies”, he adds. Heat extremes The authors examine how an intensification of heat extremes could have impacted bird populations, while controlling for other factors known to affect wildlife, including average temperature increase and human pressures, such as land-use change. Episodes of extreme heat are known to have an immediate and long-lasting impact on birds, Kotz says: “High temperature extremes can induce direct mortality in bird populations due to hyperthermia and dehydration. Even when they don’t [kill birds immediately], there’s evidence that this can then affect body condition which, in turn, affects breeding behaviour and success.” Using statistical techniques, the scientists first analyse historical records to identify how bird populations have responded to fluctuations in climate, including heat extremes, over 1950-2020. The team sourced global data on bird populations from the database that underlies the Living Planet Index, put together by the environmental charity WWF. They note it is the most comprehensive database available, but still has “clear geographic biases”, with global north regions better represented than those in the global south. They use an attribution framework to estimate the extent to which human-caused warming influenced the changes in heat extremes observed in that time period, then calculate the impact of these climate-change-driven heat extremes on bird population changes from 1950-2020. (The authors defined “heat extremes” as temperatures within the top 1% of daily temperatures over 1940-70, with data taken from ERA5, a global reanalysis dataset, which combines data from weather stations, satellites and model output.) To understand how this would compare to a world without climate change, the researchers subtract this impact from the historical records.&nbsp; Comparing their results to the counterfactual world without climate change allowed them to quantify how bird populations have changed as a result of human-driven increases in heat extremes. Mapped The research finds that human-driven heat extremes have had “strong negative impacts” on bird population numbers, with those residing at lower latitudes being the most affected. The map below shows the percentage change in bird population abundance attributed to heat extremes over 1950-2018, when compared to a world without climate change. On the map, dark red shows large decreases in population abundance, while light blue indicates small increases. (Abundance refers to the number of individual animals in a given population.)&nbsp;&nbsp; The percentage change in bird population abundance attributed to heat extremes over 1950-2018, when compared to a world without climate change. Credit: Kotz et al. (2025) The research finds that birds in the tropics have experienced the largest declines attributable to heat extremes. It concludes that an uptick in heat extremes has caused tropical bird abundance levels to decline by 25-38% in the period 1950-2020, when compared to a world without warming. The range in the size of that impact reflects the results of different models, which each use slightly different techniques to simulate changes to bird populations, Kotz says. Tropical turmoil In their paper, the authors note that their finding that tropical birds have experienced the most substantial declines are “consistent” with other studies indicating that “birds in these regions may be closer to the thermal limits at which impacts start to occur”. They add that the findings are “particularly pertinent, given recent documentation of declining tropical bird populations, even in undisturbed habitats”. One previous study found that in a “relatively undisturbed” part of the Amazon rainforest, bird abundance declined by more than 50% from 2003 to 2022. Similar results were found in a forest in Panama. The authors of the new study say: “The source of such declines have been noted as unknown, yet they are of a similar order of magnitude to our estimates of the impacts of intensified heat extremes.” Their results suggest that “in tropical realms, climate change impacts on bird populations may already be comparable to land pressures that lead to habitat destruction and degradation”, the authors say. This has “potential ramifications” for commonly proposed conservation strategies, such as increasing the amount of land in the the tropics that is protected for nature, they continue: “While we do not disagree that these strategies are necessary for abating tropical habitat loss&#8230;our research shows there is now an additional urgent need to investigate strategies that can allow for the persistence of tropical species that are vulnerable to heat extremes.” In some parts of the world, scientists and conservationists are looking into how to protect wildlife from more intense and frequent climate extremes, Kotz tells Carbon Brief. He references one project in Australia which is working to protect threatened wildlife following periods of extreme heat, drought and bushfires. Informing forecasts As well as shedding light on what could be behind the rapid decline of birds in the tropics, the findings also underscore the importance of examining changes in climate extremes, rather than just annual global temperature rise, says Prof Alex Pigot, a biodiversity scientist at University College London (UCL), who was not involved in the research. He tells Carbon Brief: “Most of the models that have been used to make projections of risk to biodiversity under future climate change use long-term climate averages and so the results of this study suggest that our existing risk assessments could be missing these critical impacts of climate change. “We urgently need to address this and develop early warning systems to be able to anticipate in advance where and when extreme heatwaves and droughts are likely to impact populations – and also rapidly scale up our monitoring of species and ecosystems so that we can reliably detect these effects and feed this information back into our models to refine our future projections for biodiversity.”&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Dr Peter Soroye, a biodiversity scientist at the Wildlife Conservation Society Canada, who was also not involved in the research, agrees: “It&#8217;s not just that the climate is getting gradually warmer every year with climate change, it&#8217;s that climate change is also driving increasingly frequent and severe extreme temperature events that are putting wildlife at risk.&nbsp; “As we more fully understand the importance of extremes, it seems increasingly important to consider them when we model or project changes in biodiversity over time.” Analysis: Record UK wildfires have burned an area twice the size of Glasgow in 2025 Extreme weather | 08.08.25 Revealed: ‘Cali Fund’ for nature still empty as emails show industry hesitation International policy | 06.08.25 Endangered angelshark faces ‘inhospitable’ breeding sites as ocean warms Marine life | 31.07.25 Cropped 30 July 2025: ‘Unprecedented’ ocean heatwaves; ‘Uneven’ hunger progress; Brazil’s ‘devastation bill’ Cropped | 30.07.25 The post Fossil-fuelled heat has caused tropical birds to decline by ‘up to 38%’ since 1950s appeared first on Carbon Brief.

[Read original article](https://www.carbonbrief.org/fossil-fuelled-heat-has-caused-tropical-birds-to-decline-by-up-to-38-since-1950s/)
