---
layout: feed_item
title: "“We are still here” – COP30 shows resolve to keep fighting climate crisis"
date: 2025-11-23 17:17:56 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['climate-policy', 'cop28', 'amazon', 'economic-impacts', 'climate-costs', 'climate-summit', 'paris-agreement', 'urgent', 'rainforest', 'emissions']
keywords: ['climate-policy', 'cop28', 'still', 'amazon', 'economic-impacts', 'climate-costs', 'shows', 'here']
description: "COP30 came to a close on Saturday afternoon in the Amazon city of Belém with government delegates grumpy and exhausted after all-night talks"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/11/23/we-are-still-here-cop30-shows-determination-to-keep-fighting-climate-crisis/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

COP30 came to a close on Saturday afternoon in the Amazon city of Belém with government delegates grumpy and exhausted after all-night talks. It ended with a political deal that was weaker than many had hoped for and which failed to tackle &#8211; or even directly mention &#8211; the elephant in the room: fossil fuels. Strong resistance from oil, coal and gas-producing countries, including Saudi Arabia, Russia and India, made it impossible to include a roadmap to transition away from fossil fuels &#8211; which European nations had fought for hard &#8211; in the final negotiated package. Brazil, instead, said it would create one, along with another roadmap on halting deforestation. There were some wins &#8211; not least that against a hostile geopolitical background, this year’s UN climate conference managed to land a deal with modest steps towards increasing ambition on cutting emissions and helping poor countries cope with worsening climate impacts. COP30 fails to land deal on fossil fuel transition but triples finance for climate adaptation At this weekend’s G20 summit, where the US was also absent, leaders of the world’s biggest economies confirmed their support for the Paris Agreement and efforts to limit global warming to its temperature goals, as well as enabling the Global South to access more finance for climate action. In one of the few political wins from COP30, the poorest countries secured a promise to triple international funding for them to adapt to more extreme weather and rising seas by 2035, though that deadline was five years later than they wanted and lacking a firm number. Perhaps the most celebrated result, however &#8211; slipping largely under the radar &#8211; was an agreement to set up a &#8220;just transition mechanism&#8221; to ensure that workers and their communities do not lose out from the shift from dirty to clean energy and get a fairer share of the benefits. Trade was another new kid on the block, with governments deciding to hold a series of dialogues on cooperating “to promote a supportive and open international economic system that would lead to sustainable economic growth and development” in all countries. Here’s a selection of reactions from top politicians, UN officials, experts and campaigners to the COP30 outcome: Marina Silva, Brazil&#8217;s Minister of the Environment and Climate Change: &#8220;I believe we can show today that, despite delays, contradictions and disputes, there is continuity between the ambition of Rio-92 and today’s effort. That we remain capable of cooperating, of learning, and of recognising that there are no shortcuts &#8211; and that the courage to confront the climate crisis is the result of persistence and collective effort. &#8220;But even if those earlier versions of us were to say we have not gone as far as we once imagined we would &#8211; or needed to &#8211; they would nevertheless recognise something essential: we are still here. And we continue steadfast in our commitment to undertake the journey necessary to overcome our differences and contradictions in urgently confronting climate change.&#8221; Juan Carlos Monterrey-Gomez, Special Representative for Climate Change &amp; National Climate Change Director of the Ministry of Environment of Panama: &#8220;Ten years after the adoption of the Paris Agreement, the negotiators that your governments sent to COP30 are not defending your future. They are defending the very industries that created this crisis: the fossil fuel industry and the forces driving global deforestation&#8230; &#8220;A Forest COP with no commitment on forests is a very bad joke. A climate decision that cannot even say “fossil fuels” is not neutrality, it is complicity. And what is happening here transcends incompetence.&#8221; António Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations: &#8220;COPs are consensus-based – and in a period of geopolitical divides, consensus is ever harder to reach. I cannot pretend that COP30 has delivered everything that is needed.&#8220;COP30 is over, but our work is not. I will continue pushing for higher ambition and greater solidarity. To all those who marched, negotiated, advised, reported and mobilised: do not give up. History is on your side – and so is the United Nations.&#8221; Al Gore, former US Vice President: &#8220;Despite petrostates’ attempt to veto the development of a roadmap away from fossil fuels, the Brazilian COP30 Presidency will lead an effort to develop this roadmap, bolstered by the more than 80 countries that already support the effort. Ultimately, petrostates, the fossil fuel industry, and their allies are losing power&#8230; &#8220;The rest of the world is fed up with delay and denial. Now is the time to forge global partnerships among all levels of government, the private sector, finance, and civil society to cultivate and achieve the level of action necessary to fulfill the promise the world made to future generations under the Paris Agreement.&#8221; Inger Andersen, United Nations Environment Programme Executive Director: &#8220;COP30&#8230; reinforced the growing global momentum, both in and outside of the negotiating halls, to transition away from fossil fuels as agreed in Dubai at COP28, halt deforestation &#8211; including the launch of the Tropical Forest Forever Facility that now stands at US$6.7 billion &#8211; and pursue rapid, high-impact measures such as cutting methane emissions. &#8220;The Action Agenda, the foundation to such an inclusive COP from the Brazil Presidency that saw unprecedented Indigenous Peoples leadership from the Amazon and across the world, reinforced momentum is coming from all sources, including businesses, cities and regions, local communities, civil society, women, people of African descent, youth, and many more.&#8221; Toya Manchineri, Manchineri Peoples, Coordination of Indigenous Organizations of the Brazilian Amazon (COIAB): &#8220;Indigenous Peoples will remain vigilant, mobilised, and present beyond COP30 to ensure that our voices are respected and that global decisions reflect the urgency we experience in our territories. For some, COP ends today, for us territorial defense in the heart of the Amazon is every day.&#8221; Kaysie Brown, Associate Director, Climate Diplomacy &amp; Geopolitics, E3G: “In an increasingly turbulent and multi-polar world, COP30 was a litmus test of whether political will and commitment to multilateralism could keep pace with the momentum already evident in the real economy. &#8220;A deal was always going to be hard-fought, and the outcome on the table shows that Parties were not consistently resolute in pursuing the level of collective ambition required. Even so, there are important foundations to build on &#8211; elements that can be translated into tangible acceleration of real-world progress.&#8221; Li Shuo, Director of the China Climate Hub at the Asia Society Policy Institute: &#8220;COP30 marks a new inflection point in global climate politics. As national climate ambition slows, international negotiations are now constrained by diminishing political will. When the United States steps back, others are left cautious and indecisive. &#8220;Belém has laid bare an urgent truth: in the absence of strong political momentum for greater ambition, the climate agenda will be driven less by the COP process and more by the economic forces unfolding in the real world.&#8221; Mohamed Adow, Director, Power Shift Africa: “With an increasingly fractured geopolitical backdrop, COP30 gave us some baby steps in the right direction, but considering the scale of the climate crisis, it has failed to rise to the occasion. &#8220;Among the green shoots to emerge was the creation of a Just Transition Action Mechanism &#8211; a recognition that the global move away from fossil fuels will not abandon workers and frontline communities. &#8220;COP30 kept the process alive — but process alone will not cool the planet. Roadmaps and workplans will mean nothing unless they now translate into real finance and real action for the countries bearing the brunt of the crisis.&#8221; Tasneem Essop, Executive Director, Climate Action Network International: “We came here to get the Belém Action Mechanism &#8211; for families, for workers, for communities. The adoption of a Just Transition mechanism was a win shaped by years of pressure from civil society. &#8220;This outcome didn’t fall from the sky; it was carved out through struggle, persistence, and the moral clarity of those living on the frontlines of climate breakdown. Governments must now honour this Just Transition mechanism with real action. Anything less is a betrayal of people &#8211; and of the Paris promise.&#8221; Ani Dasgupta, President &amp; CEO, World Resources Institute:&nbsp; “COP30 delivered breakthroughs to triple adaptation finance, protect the world’s forests and elevate the voices of Indigenous people like never before. This shows that even against a challenging geopolitical backdrop, international climate cooperation can still deliver results&#8230; &#8220;COP30 succeeded in putting people at the center of climate action. Indigenous Peoples participated in record numbers and made their voices heard. The Global Ethical Stocktake affirmed that fairness, inclusion, and responsibility must guide every decision. New commitments for Indigenous Peoples’ and communities’ land rights and finance offer a strong step forward, though far more is needed.&#8221; The post &#8220;We are still here&#8221; &#8211; COP30 shows resolve to keep fighting climate crisis appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/11/23/we-are-still-here-cop30-shows-determination-to-keep-fighting-climate-crisis/)
