---
layout: feed_item
title: "COP30 Bulletin Day 5: Indigenous peoples blockade talks to defend territories"
date: 2025-11-14 15:36:50 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['rainforest', 'fossil-fuels', 'emissions', 'amazon', 'urgent', 'year-2025']
keywords: ['rainforest', 'fossil-fuels', 'emissions', 'amazon', 'peoples', 'bulletin', 'urgent', 'indigenous']
description: "Long queues formed as delegates were asked to enter through what is normally the venue&#8217;s exit to access the negotiations"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/11/14/cop30-bulletin-day-5-indigenous-peoples-blockade-talks-to-defend-territories/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Carrying traditional spears and signs calling for an end to the exploitation of the Amazon rainforest, dozens of Indigenous people blocked the main entrance to the COP30 climate summit on Friday morning. Long queues formed as delegates were asked to enter through what is normally the venue&#8217;s exit to access the negotiations. The peaceful protest ended after several hours when COP30 bosses André Corrêa do Lago and Ana Toni joined the demonstrators to listen to their concerns. Climate Home understands that COP30 President Corrêa do Lago invited the group of Indigenous people to a meeting with Brazilian environment minister Marina Silva this morning. The protesters, belonging to the Munduruku tribe, demanded an end to development projects, including large-scale infrastructure and mining that affect the rights of Indigenous people living in the Valley of the Tapajós River in the Amazon, InfoAmazonia reported.&nbsp; They carried signs displaying slogans like “fighting for our territories is fighting for our lives” alongside images showing the destruction of natural habitats.&nbsp;&nbsp; While delegates waited in a long queue in Belém’s hot, humid weather, many remarked that it was refreshing to see a COP presidency engage directly with demonstrators. Over the past three summits &#8211; in Egypt, the United Arab Emirates and Azerbaijan &#8211; similar protests outside UN venues had been effectively banned. “This is what happens when you finally host the talks in a democracy,” one said.&nbsp; Nov 13, 2025 News Despite record turnout, only 14% of Indigenous Brazilians get access to COP30 decision-making spaces Around 2,500 Indigenous people from across Brazil have gathered in Belém, with leaders demanding a bigger role in the negotiations Read more Nov 13, 2025 Politics COP30 Bulletin Day 4: African and Arab groups want adaptation indicator delay The groups are concerned that the current indicators will pressure them to spend more of their own governments&#8217; scarce funds on adaptation Read more Nov 13, 2025 News At COP30, roadmap away from fossil fuels gains ground &#8211; but next step unclear Ministers from Brazil, Germany and UK &#8211; with support from five more countries &#8211; expressed support for a roadmap away from fossil fuels at COP30 Read more During the sit-in, Brazilian army officers in riot gear formed a protective cordon in front of the venue’s main entrance. The COP30 hosts have stepped up security measures after a group of Indigenous protesters on Tuesday evening forced their way into the conference centre and clashed with security guards. Brazil, the host nation of COP30, has stressed the importance of giving Indigenous people a voice in this year’s climate negotiations. But Indigenous people are frustrated that more cannot access the negotiating area of the COP30 venue, known as the Blue Zone. According to analysis by InfoAmazonia, only 360 of 2,500 Indigenous Brazilians received accreditation for that space. The Brazilian government says that’s more than any previous COP &#8211; but it’s only a small fraction of the 56,000 people registered to attend this year’s UN climate talks. Climate Home joined a flotilla of dozens of boats on Wednesday when hundreds of Indigenous people, many hailing from the Tapajós River region, sailed in the Amazon River delta to raise concerns about Brazil’s oil and gas, mining and agricultural expansion in their forests. The post COP30 Bulletin Day 5: Indigenous peoples blockade talks to defend territories appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/11/14/cop30-bulletin-day-5-indigenous-peoples-blockade-talks-to-defend-territories/)
