---
layout: feed_item
title: "Kerr County’s tragic flood wasn’t an outlier. It was a preview."
date: 2025-07-21 08:30:00 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['urgent', 'year-2025', 'wildfires', 'extreme-weather', 'flooding', 'climate-risk', 'insurance']
keywords: ['urgent', 'year-2025', 'wildfires', 'flooding', 'extreme-weather', 'county', 'tragic', 'kerr']
description: "The country watched in horror as torrential rain drenched Texas earlier this month, sweeping at least 135 people to their death"
external_url: https://grist.org/extreme-weather/kerr-countys-tragic-flood-wasnt-an-outlier-it-was-a-preview/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Grist"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

The country watched in horror as torrential rain drenched Texas earlier this month, sweeping at least 135 people to their death. Kerr County alone lost 107, including more than two dozen children at Camp Mystic. From afar, it would be easy, even tempting, to think that the floods like these could never happen to you. That the disaster is remote.&nbsp; It’s not.&nbsp; As details of the tragedy have come into focus, the list of contributing factors has grown. Sudden downpours, driven by climate change. The lack of a comprehensive warning system to notify people that the Guadalupe river was rising rapidly. Rampant building in areas known to flood, coupled with&nbsp; incomplete information about what places might be at risk. ’&nbsp; These are the same elements that could trigger a Kerr County-type of catastrophe in every state in the country. It’s a reality that has played out numerous times already in recent years, with flooding in Vermont, Kentucky, North Carolina and elsewhere, leaving grief and billions of dollars in destruction in its wake. “Kerr County is an extreme example of what&#8217;s happening everywhere,” said Robert Freudenberg, vice president of energy and environmental programs at the Regional Planning Association. “People are at risk because of it and there&#8217;s more that we need to be doing.” The most obvious problem is we keep building in areas prone to flooding. The Federal Emergency Management Agency, or FEMA, produces readily available maps showing high-risk locales. Yet, according to the latest data from the nonprofit climate research firm First Street Foundation, 7.9 million homes and other structures stand in a FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area, which designates a location with 1 percent or greater chance of being inundated in any given year. FEMA Flood Zone Top Ten RankStatePercent of PropertiesNumber of Properties1Louisiana22.83%542,7562Florida17.15%1,581,5523Mississippi12.41%240,5264New Jersey10.57%364,0985West Virginia9.29%126,9186Arkansas7.27%146,2267Texas6.49%806,8278Iowa6.32%154,2179New Mexico6.28%94,26510Nebraska6.18%71,235Source: First Street Foundation In Louisiana, a nation-leading 23 percent of properties are located in a FEMA flood zone. In Florida, it’s about 17 percent. Arkansas, New Mexico and Nebraska are perhaps less expected members of the top ten, as is New Jersey, which, with New York City, saw torrential rain and flooding that killed two people earlier this month. Texas ranks seventh in the country, with about 800,000 properties, or roughly 6.5 percent of the state’s total, sitting in a flood zone. Kerr County officials have limited authority to keep people from building in these areas, but even when governments have the ability to prevent risky building projects, they historically haven’t. Although one study found that some areas are finally beginning to curb floodplain development, people keep building in perilous places.“There&#8217;s an innate draw to the water that we have, but we need to know where the limits are,” said Freudenberg. “In places that are really dangerous, we need to work towards getting people out of harm&#8217;s way.” Kerr County sits in a region known as Flash Flood Alley and at least four cabins at Camp Mystic sat in an extremely hazardous “floodway” and numerous others stood in the path of a 100-year flood. When the Christian summer camp for girls underwent an expansion in 2019, the owners built even more cabins in the water’s path.&nbsp; “It&#8217;s an unwillingness to think about what future — and the present — have in store for us,” said Rob Moore, the director of the Water &amp; Climate Team at the Natural Resources Defense Council, or NRDC, about Americans&#8217; tradition of floodplain development. ”It&#8217;s a reluctance to own up to the reality we live in.”&nbsp; Many people don’t even know they are in harm&#8217;s way. According to NRDC, 14 states have no flood disclosure laws and, in eight, they deem the laws ‘inadequate.’ FEMA maps are also flawed. For one, they can be politically influenced, with homeowners and communities often lobbying to be excluded in order to avoid insurance mandates and potential building costs. And experts say the science underpinning the maps is lagging too. “[FEMA] only maps main river channels and coastal storm surge areas,” explained Jeremy Porter, the head of climate implications research at First Street Foundation. The agency, he added, specifically doesn&#8217;t model heavy rainfall, isn&#8217;t great about indicating the risk of urban flooding, and is behind on accounting for climate change.&nbsp; First Street Flood Zone Top Ten RankStatePercent of PropertiesNumber of Properties1West Virginia30.25%413,4992Louisiana26.33%626,1203Florida19.04%1,755,3634New Jersey17.32%596,5215Mississippi15.46%299,5666Kentucky15.30%328,2837Texas15.19%1,888,2828Pennsylvania14.93%856,8899New York14.27%771,60510Delaware12.95%55,535Source: First Street Foundation First Street built a flood model that tries to fill in those gaps. It found that 17.7 million people are at risk of a 100-year flood, a number that’s more than double what FEMA’s hazard area covers.The state rankings also change, with mountainous areas susceptible to inland flash-flooding jumping up the list. West Virginia moves into first, with a staggering 30 percent of properties built in flood prone areas. Kentucky climbs from 19th to sixth.Texas remains at seventh, but the portion of properties at risk goes to 15 percent. In Kerr County, FEMA’s maps showed 2,560 properties (6.5 percent) in a flood zone. First Street’s model nearly doubled that. “There&#8217;s a ton of unknown risk across the country,” said Porter, who says better maps are among the most important goals that policy makers can and should work toward. First Street has partnered with the real estate website Redfin to include climate risk metrics in its listings.&nbsp; Rob Moore says political will is essential to making that type of systemic change when it comes to not only flooding, but other climate risks, such as wildfires or coastal erosion. Strengthening building codes and restricting development in high-risk areas will require similar fortitude. “Governments and states don&#8217;t want to tell developers to not put things in a wetland, not put things in a floodplain,” he said. “We should be telling people don&#8217;t put them in a flatland, don&#8217;t build in a way that your home is going to be more susceptible to wildfire.”&nbsp; Until then, hundreds of communities across the country could — and likely will — be the next Kerr County.&nbsp; This story was originally published by Grist with the headline Kerr County’s tragic flood wasn’t an outlier. It was a preview. on Jul 21, 2025.

[Read original article](https://grist.org/extreme-weather/kerr-countys-tragic-flood-wasnt-an-outlier-it-was-a-preview/)
