---
layout: feed_item
title: "At climate summit, UN chief urges countries to go “much further, much faster” on NDCs"
date: 2025-09-24 19:11:29 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['urgent', 'emissions', 'climate-policy', 'paris-agreement', 'climate-summit', 'fossil-fuels', 'cop28']
keywords: ['urgent', 'emissions', 'climate-policy', 'paris-agreement', 'climate-summit', 'chief', 'summit', 'climate']
description: "Hinting at an expected shortfall in the ambition needed to reduce emissions in line with the Paris Agreement 1"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/09/24/at-climate-summit-un-chief-urges-countries-to-go-much-further-much-faster-on-ndcs/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

UN Secretary-General: COP30 must deliver global response plan UN Secretary-General António Guterres urged world leaders to deliver climate plans that go “much further, much faster” as he kicked off today’s climate summit at UN headquarters. Hinting at an expected shortfall in the ambition needed to reduce emissions in line with the Paris Agreement 1.5C temperature limit, he said November’s COP30 must end with a “credible global response plan” to get world efforts back on track.&nbsp; Guterres, who convened the gathering, outlined five areas for priority action, putting energy at the top. Despite clean energy’s competitiveness, fossil fuels still dominate, he said, calling on countries to “supercharge” the energy transition by investing in grids and storage, lowering investment costs for developing countries and shifting subsidies away from fossil fuels. “Drastic cuts” in methane emissions are essential and can be achieved quickly and cheaply, Guterres added. A potent gas with a shorter lifespan than carbon dioxide, methane is widely considered a low-hanging fruit to slow global warming.&nbsp; The International Energy Agency reckons around 40% of methane emissions from fossil fuels could be cut at no net cost. That’s because interventions like identifying and repairing leaky infrastructure cost less than the market value of the additional gas fossil fuel operators would be able to capture and sell, the watchdog said.&nbsp; The UN chief then highlighted the need to end the destruction of forests, which he described as “nature’s greatest carbon sinks”. At COP28 two years ago, countries committed to ending and reversing deforestation by 2030. Guterres said that could deliver a fifth of the needed emission reductions by the end of this decade. At the moment, that goal remains way off track as forest loss keeps rising.&nbsp; Guterres also called for governments to urgently deploy new technologies that can cut emissions from steel and cement production, as well as heavy transport. Those sectors are generally considered harder to decarbonise because they require substantial amounts of energy, and efforts to make them greener rely on less mature, or more expensive, solutions like hydrogen or alternative fuels.&nbsp; Finally, Guterres made an appeal for climate justice. The finance gaps preventing investment in climate resilience across the developing world should be plugged, he said. That means reforming the international financial architecture, offering “effective” debt relief, raising contributions to the loss and damage fund, and boosting adaptation finance.&nbsp; Brazil&#8217;s president: Submitting NDCs is &#8220;not an option&#8221; Opening the summit together with the UN chief, President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva urged countries to submit their new climate plans (Nationally Determined Contributions &#8211; NDCs) before COP30, which is happening in the Brazilian state of Pará this November.&nbsp; “The submissions of NDCs is not an option. As it was made clear by the International Court of Justice, it is an obligation,” he said referring to its advisory opinion on climate change and human rights handed down in July.&nbsp; He added that only by having all countries respect their commitments and submit their NDCs, will the world know where it stands in the battle against climate change. No one is safe from the effects of it, he said, not even the countries that are part of what he called “multilateral denialism”. As he spoke, only 47 countries had presented their plans.&nbsp; Brazil was the second country to present its NDC, last November. It aims to reduce emissions of all greenhouse gases by between 59% and 67% across all sectors of the economy and end deforestation by 2030.&nbsp; Lula championed multilateralism in multiple parts of his speech, saying that COP30 can be “the stage for a decisive moment in” its history. “I call on the countries that have not yet submitted their NDCs. The success of COP30 in Belém depends on you.” He also said that if the world doesn’t come together and take decisions that respect what science says, civil society will stop trusting its leaders, “and instead of strengthening the struggle against global warming, we are going to help discredit multilateralism policies and in democracy. And all of us will lose because denialism may actually win.” The post At climate summit, UN chief urges countries to go &#8220;much further, much faster&#8221; on NDCs appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/09/24/at-climate-summit-un-chief-urges-countries-to-go-much-further-much-faster-on-ndcs/)
