---
layout: feed_item
title: "COP30 could confront “glaring gap” in clean energy agenda: mining"
date: 2025-10-27 08:02:03 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['urgent', 'renewable-energy', 'rainforest', 'solar-power', 'amazon', 'emissions', 'climate-costs', 'year-2025', 'climate-health', 'wind-power']
keywords: ['urgent', 'renewable-energy', 'confront', 'rainforest', 'solar-power', 'amazon', 'could', 'glaring']
description: "Diplomats preparing for COP30 in the Brazilian city of Belém next month have been discussing an emerging issue that could feature for the first time at a UN ..."
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/10/27/cop30-could-confront-glaring-gap-in-clean-energy-agenda-mining/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Diplomats preparing for COP30 in the Brazilian city of Belém next month have been discussing an emerging issue that could feature for the first time at a UN climate summit: the global rush for energy transition minerals. Metals such as copper, cobalt, lithium, nickel and graphite are vital for manufacturing clean energy transition technologies such as solar panels, wind turbines, batteries and electric vehicles &#8211; creating both new opportunities and risks for resource-rich countries. Soaring demand for minerals – which are also used in the construction, digital and military sectors – provides an opportunity to spur economic development if mining is responsible and producing countries can turn their resources into high-value products. But increased mining activity has fuelled environmental destruction, deforestation and conflict with communities, from Indonesia &#8211; which is opening new coal plants to power its nickel industry &#8211; to Zambia and Chile. Oct 22, 2025 News Brazil hails World Bank decision to host forest fund ahead of COP30 launch Brazil&#8217;s showcase forest protection proposal, the Tropical Forest Forever Facility (TFFF), is betting on financial markets to keep rainforests standing Read more Oct 21, 2025 News Ahead of COP30, Brazil grants Petrobras a licence to drill for oil in Amazon region Brazil has authorised Petrobras to explore for oil off the Amazon coast, a move campaigners say undermines global climate goals Read more Oct 21, 2025 Comment COP30 needs an implementation forum, not another cover decision The focus in Belém should be a plan to get results on climate action in the real world rather than haggling over a political statement Read more In preparatory talks over the past couple of months, developing countries with extensive mineral reserves, notably Latin American and African states, have warned that mining could become the Achilles heel of a just energy transition unless environmental and social safeguards are put in place to ensure the costs and benefits are shared fairly. Diplomats have discussed the impacts of mining in negotiations on the social and economic implications of climate action, known as &#8220;response measures&#8221;. They also raised the issue during talks to define the scope of a work stream to ensure that the transition from fossil fuels to clean energy is fair to workers, protects nature and support economic development, called the Just Transition Work Programme. Civil society push for COP to tackle transition minerals Brazil&#8217;s COP30 presidency has made an agreement with “concrete outcomes” on a just transition framework a key priority of the summit in Belém. &nbsp; Separately, the government has spoken about the need for energy transition mineral production to respect human rights and promote sustainable development. &#8220;In its interventions across international forums, Brazil has expressed support for the inclusion of principles that promote transparency, address illicit activities and corruption, encourage value addition in developing countries, and uphold environmental protection and human rights in the context of critical minerals production,&#8221; a COP30 spokesperson told Climate Home News. The inclusion of energy transition minerals in COP30 decisions will require consensus among all countries but observers are cautiously optimistic. Colombia proposes expert group to advance talks on minerals agreement &#8220;The stars do seem to be aligning for COP30 to be the first to address the role of transition minerals governance in climate action but it&#8217;s still not a given,&#8221; said Antonio Hill, an advisor on the Natural Resource Governance Institute’s just transitions advocacy work. &#8220;If achieved, it would address a glaring gap in the current global climate and energy transition agenda,&#8221; he added. More than 200 civil society groups have signed an open letter urging countries to address energy transition minerals at COP30. They called on them to welcome principles and recommendations of a UN panel on establishing transparent, sustainable and equitable mineral supply chains and to strengthen mineral governance. A “timely and necessary” discussion In a submission ahead of talks on the implications of climate measures last month, a coalition of 134 developing countries – known as the G77 and China &#8211; called for a “dedicated dialogue” on energy transition minerals. It described it as “both timely and necessary” to enable countries to consider how growing mineral demand relates to their development priorities and climate plans. The current dynamic &#8220;presents a serious risk of entrenching unsustainable development trajectories, undermining efforts toward industrial diversification, and jeopardising the prospects of a truly just transition for developing countries&#8221;, it said. More than half of energy transition mineral reserves are estimated to be located on or near Indigenous land and a large majority of mines are located in biodiversity hotspots. Indigenous peoples are widely acknowledged to play a key role in preserving tropical forests that act as some of the world&#8217;s most important carbon sinks. Road to the SCM nickel mine in southeast Sulawesi, Indonesia, which holds one of the world’s largest reserves of nickel. Photo: Franco Bravo Dengo The issue was also raised during talks on defining a just energy transition framework. The Independent Association of Latin America and the Caribbean (AILAC), which includes Colombia, Chile and Peru, warned that deforestation and land use changes caused by mineral extraction could undermine climate action and affect people’s rights to a healthy environment. “A just transition approach could offer unique opportunities towards fairness and equity in the mining industry” and contribute to local development, the group said. Colombia, which is proposing that countries discuss options for a binding agreement on minerals at the UN Environment Assembly in December, went further and called for the designation of “no-go areas” for mining. No-go mining zones Colombia&#8217;s demands are echoed by Indigenous groups. Bryan Bixcul is from the Maya-Tz&#8217;utujil Indigenous group in Guatemala and serves as the global coordinator of the Securing Indigenous Peoples’ Rights in the Green Economy (SIRGE) coalition. He told Climate Home the Just Transition Work Programme will fail to be a tool for justice if it fails to directly address the harms caused by mining. Efforts to green lithium extraction face scrutiny over water use Key to SIRGE’s demand is for the text to make explicit references to the rights of Indigenous peoples, including those in voluntary isolation. Bixcul said the text should include an obligation to establish “no-go” or exclusion zones on and around the land of the world’s remaining uncontacted Indigenous groups, which cannot give their consent to mining projects close to their lands. This, he said, violates the principle of no contact. Protecting uncontacted Indigenous peoples Videos have emerged showing members of an uncontacted Indigenous group warning outsiders away and begging for food on a site where forest was being cleared for nickel mining on Halmahera island in Indonesia. NGO Survival International warned that the uncontacted Hongana Manyawa people, who live on the island, faced “a threat of genocide” because of nickel mining used to make batteries for electric vehicles. In September, Norway’s government pension fund divested from French miner Eramet, which operates a large mine on the island, citing “unacceptable risk” of human rights violations, including forced contact. Eramet denied the presence of uncontacted groups in or near its concession. “If countries don&#8217;t take a stance to protect the rights of Indigenous peoples in voluntary isolation, they will fail human rights, not just Indigenous people&#8217;s rights,” said Bixcul. Brazil, which has promised the largest Indigenous participation in COP history in Belém, has called on countries to protect the demarcation of Indigenous lands as a key policy tool to address the climate crisis. The post COP30 could confront &#8220;glaring gap&#8221; in clean energy agenda: mining appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/10/27/cop30-could-confront-glaring-gap-in-clean-energy-agenda-mining/)
