---
layout: feed_item
title: "Despite record turnout, only 14% of Indigenous Brazilians get access to COP30 decision-making spaces"
date: 2025-11-13 21:45:35 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['fossil-fuels', 'amazon', 'oceania', 'australia', 'year-2023', 'public-health', 'urgent', 'emissions', 'rainforest', 'climate-health']
keywords: ['record', 'fossil-fuels', 'amazon', 'turnout', 'oceania', 'australia', 'year-2023', 'despite']
description: "Yet only 14% of those from Brazil (360 individuals) have secured accreditation for the Blue Zone, the restricted area for official negotiations"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/11/13/despite-record-turnout-only-14-of-indigenous-brazilians-get-access-to-cop30-decision-making-spaces/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Indigenous peoples have converged on Belém to participate in the COP30 UN climate summit, which opened on Monday – yet many of them will not be able to enter the part of the conference where governments make key decisions. According to The Coalition of Indigenous Peoples of Brazil (APIB), about 2,500 Indigenous representatives &#8211; the most ever at a COP &#8211; are expected to attend. Yet only 14% of those from Brazil (360 individuals) have secured accreditation for the Blue Zone, the restricted area for official negotiations. The previous record for Indigenous participation was set in Paris in 2015 and matched in Dubai in 2023, with about 350 Indigenous attendees each, according to COP30 organizers. This broader turnout results from Brazilian initiatives to include as many peoples as possible in climate discussions. These include the Peoples&#8217; Circle &#8211; an umbrella group for Afro-Brazilian, Indigenous and traditional communities &#8211; a dedicated pavilion in the Green Zone, and the COP Village, a camp welcoming participants from Tuesday this week. Nov 13, 2025 Politics COP30 Bulletin Day 4: African and Arab groups want adaptation indicator delay The groups are concerned that the current indicators will pressure them to spend more of their own governments&#8217; scarce funds on adaptation Read more Nov 12, 2025 Politics COP30 Bulletin Day 3: Brazil tries to find a home for tricky issues Brazil is trying to craft a compromise package on several contentious issues and has dismissed the idea of a roadmap away from fossil fuels Read more Nov 11, 2025 Politics COP30 Bulletin Day 2: Ethiopia picked as COP32 host, while COP31 standoff continues African nations backed Ethiopia’s bid to host the 2027 summit over Nigeria’s, while Australia and Türkiye remain deadlocked over next year’s host decision Read more Indigenous participants from Brazil attend as part of the party overflow category, which lets the country include additional representatives beyond its official UN delegation. The 360 credentials were transferred to APIB, which gathered nominations from regional organizations and submitted the final roster to Itamaraty, Brazil&#8217;s Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Holders of this credential can enter negotiating areas but cannot contribute to discussions, vote or join closed meetings. Still, they can follow delegations closely, so they can interact with national experts, participate in side events and share their perspectives on negotiation priorities. Blue Zone/Green Zone separatism However, Indigenous people who took part in a demonstration that turned violent at the entrance to the Blue Zone on Tuesday said they wanted to catch the attention of the UN and the Brazilian government regarding their inability to participate in the proceedings. They are critical of the Green Zone/Blue Zone division established by the UN, which separates most civil society from the spaces where countries’ negotiators and official delegations circulate. The protest at COP30 took place in the evening, when a group of unaccredited demonstrators entered the restricted area and clashed with security guards. Videos recorded the moment when the group pushed doors and ran into the area. Indigenous leader Gilson Tupinambá, from Papagayo village in the Tapajós Arapiuns Extractive Reserve area, explained that it was a way to take a stance against the UN framework. “Reflecting on this separatism, this ‘apartheid’, we don’t want this Blue Zone/Green Zone separatism,” he said. An Indigenous demonstrator is held by a staff member as protesters forced their way into the venue hosting the UN Climate Change Conference (COP30), in Belem, Brazil. (Photo: REUTERS/Anderson Coelho) An Indigenous demonstrator is held by a staff member as protesters forced their way into the venue hosting the UN Climate Change Conference (COP30), in Belem, Brazil. (Photo: REUTERS/Anderson Coelho) In an interview with InfoAmazonia, Brazil’s Minister of Indigenous Peoples Sonia Guajajara said she regretted what happened: “I’m deeply sorry about that because, if the idea was to guarantee participation, this COP already has the largest indigenous participation in the history of COPs.” Toya Manchineri, coordinator of the Coordination of Indigenous Organizations of the Brazilian Amazon (Coiab), believes participation is still insufficient. Indigenous leaders want to be included in Brazil&#8217;s official delegation, he said. &#8220;Ideally, we would participate as negotiators within the official country delegation, right? That would make a real difference. In a conversation with [Indigenous Peoples] Minister Sônia [Guajajara], I told her: &#8216;Minister, let&#8217;s work together so the Brazilian government considers Indigenous leaders as part of the official delegations for negotiations.&#8217; It would make this a different COP,&#8221; he said. Dredging for minerals in the Amazon Lucas Tupinambá, a young Indigenous leader from the Tapajós-Arapiuns Indigenous Council and resident of Santo Amaro village along the Tapajós River, spent two days traveling by boat to reach COP30. He attended the opening plenary session on Monday, where he denounced the presence of dredgers &#8211; vessels extracting minerals from the river &#8211; around the Tapajós and demanded climate mitigation and adaptation measures. At first, Lucas was struck by the COP30 venue but criticized its separation from the local community. &#8220;To be here, you need accreditation, and in my region, only two people received it. The process is also expensive. They are not interested in hearing from those who truly need to be heard,&#8221; he said. He is particularly concerned about the oil agenda and resource exploitation in the Amazon. &#8220;We have to stay alert, because many events take place throughout the day. As a social movement, we must constantly monitor where these discussions are happening. Before any talks about oil, dredging Amazonian rivers, privatization or any measure that could harm the rights of Amazonian peoples, they must listen to us,&#8221; he said. Young indigenous people protest against new transport infrastructure planned in the Amazon during an event on the COP30 Indigenous flotilla in Belem, Brazil (Photo: Mariel Lozada) Young indigenous people protest against new transport infrastructure planned in the Amazon during an event on the COP30 Indigenous flotilla in Belem, Brazil (Photo: Mariel Lozada) Land demarcation as climate policy APIB, Brazil&#8217;s leading Indigenous organization, has a clear goal for the conference: to make Indigenous land demarcation an official climate policy, enshrined in the country&#8217;s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC). This push, underway for two years, is led by the &#8216;We Are the Answer&#8217; campaign, which has reached Indigenous communities worldwide. &#8220;Our core message is that demarcation and territorial protection are policies for facing the climate emergency. This needs not just to be acknowledged, but also implemented by global leaders &#8211; and in our case, above all, by Brazil,&#8221; says Kleber Karipuna, APIB&#8217;s executive coordinator. APIB has championed this agenda at major events, including the Pre-COP in Brasília and Climate Week in New York. It was also presented during the COParente Cycle, an initiative under the Peoples&#8217; Circle led by the Ministry of Indigenous Peoples (MPI) and the National Foundation for Indigenous Peoples (FUNAI), which took place in various territories. At COP30, roadmap away from fossil fuels gains ground – but next step unclear At the opening plenary on Monday, President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva echoed APIB&#8217;s call, urging the international community to &#8220;recognize the role of Indigenous territories and traditional communities in mitigation efforts.&#8221; His remarks suggest possible paths forward. For Toya Manchineri, the challenge now is persuading all participating countries to include this measure in the final COP30 agreement. &#8220;For us, it&#8217;s already a victory that the president recognizes this need. Now we&#8217;ll see if he can persuade other heads of state,&#8221; he said. Indigenous programming At COP conferences, Indigenous organizations participate in plenary sessions, debating issues such as territorial protection, extreme weather impacts, mining, adaptation strategies and health, among other topics. For COP30, the presidency established the Peoples&#8217; Circle, led by Minister Sônia Guajajara. This forum includes two main bodies: the International Indigenous Commission, with Indigenous representatives worldwide, and the International Commission of Traditional Communities, Afro-descendants and Family Farmers, bringing together delegates from 16 Latin American countries. The Peoples&#8217; Circle has its own pavilion at the conference, serving as a venue for climate justice debates and amplifying grassroots civil society voices who share insights from their territories. In addition on Monday, the assembly of the COP Village, a camp at the Federal University of Pará (UFPA), supported by the Ministry of Indigenous Peoples (MPI), began. There, plenary debates on climate change and its impact on Indigenous lands are being held. The Ministry of Indigenous Peoples (MPI) expects 3,000 attendees from Brazil and abroad. &#8220;We worked closely with the COP presidency to ensure this level of participation and visibility for Indigenous peoples. I believe this will leave a legacy that extends beyond mere participation,” said APIB leader Kleber Karipuna. Securing such a large Indigenous presence at COP30 in Brazil is unprecedented—a historic achievement, both in the Blue Zone and other venues.” This report was produced by InfoAmazonia as part of the COP30 Socio-Environmental Collaborative Coverage initiative. Read the original report here (this is an updated version): https://infoamazonia.org/2025/11/10/mesmo-com-presenca-recorde-apenas-14-dos-indigenas-brasileiros-devem-acessar-espaco-de-decisao-na-cop30/ The post Despite record turnout, only 14% of Indigenous Brazilians get access to COP30 decision-making spaces appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/11/13/despite-record-turnout-only-14-of-indigenous-brazilians-get-access-to-cop30-decision-making-spaces/)
