---
layout: feed_item
title: "IPCC agrees on the scientific content of the remaining methodology report in the seventh assessment cycle and 2026 workplan for the three key climate reports"
date: 2025-10-31 02:15:35 +0000
categories: [climate_science]
tags: ['cop28', 'carbon-capture', 'climate-science', 'year-2026', 'climate-summit', 'ccs', 'ipcc', 'urgent']
keywords: ['cop28', 'agrees', 'climate-science', 'carbon-capture', 'scientific', 'year-2026', 'climate-summit', 'ipcc']
description: "This is one of two methodology reports of the seventh assessment cycle"
external_url: https://www.ipcc.ch/2025/10/31/pr-ipcc63-final/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "IPCC"
feed_category: "climate_science"
---

LIMA, Oct 30 – The member governments of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) agreed on the scientific content of the 2027 Methodology Report on Carbon Dioxide Removal Technologies, Carbon Capture Utilization and Storage at the Panel’s 63rd Plenary session, which closed this evening in Lima, Peru. This is one of two methodology reports of the seventh assessment cycle. Carbon Dioxide Removal refers to anthropogenic activities that remove CO2 from the atmosphere and store it durably in geological reservoirs or in products. The decision opens the next important stage in the report production in which member governments, observer organizations, and IPCC Bureau members will nominate experts to serve as authors. With this decision, the entire scientific content of all planned reports for the seventh assessment cycle has been agreed upon, clearing the way for their production. The Panel also agreed on the 2026 workplan for the three Working Group contributions to the Seventh Assessment Report (AR7). The Panel invited the three Working Groups to continue their work by convening Lead Author meetings and other activities planned and budgeted for 2026. The work on the three Working Group contributions to the Seventh Assessment Report will kick off in Paris already in December this year with the first-ever joint Lead Author meeting. “Panel’s decisions in Lima give strong impetus to our work on our methodology reports and ensure the continuity of IPCC scientific activities and operations related to the production of the three Working Group contributions to the Seventh Assessment Report,” said IPCC Chair Jim Skea. The three Working Group contributions assess the physical science basis of climate change; impacts, adaptation and vulnerability; and mitigation of climate change. The Panel also approved IPCC’s overall budget for 2026. For more information, contact: IPCC Press Office Email: ipcc-media@wmo.int Andrej Mahecic: +41 79 704 2459 Werani Zabula: +41 22 730 8120 Notes for Editors What is the IPCC? The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is the UN body for assessing the science related to climate change. It was established by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) in 1988 to provide political leaders with periodic scientific assessments concerning climate change, its implications and risks, as well as to put forward adaptation and mitigation strategies. In the same year the UN General Assembly endorsed the action by the WMO and UNEP in jointly establishing the IPCC. It has 195 member states. Thousands of people from all over the world contribute to the work of the IPCC. For the assessment reports, scientists and experts volunteer their time as IPCC authors to assess the thousands of scientific papers published each year to provide a comprehensive summary of what is known about the drivers of climate change, its impacts and future risks, and how adaptation and mitigation can reduce those risks. The IPCC has three working groups: Working Group I, dealing with the physical science basis of climate change; Working Group II, dealing with impacts, adaptation and vulnerability; and Working Group III, dealing with the mitigation of climate change. It also has a Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories that develops methodologies for measuring emissions and removals. IPCC assessments provide governments, at all levels, with scientific information that they can use to develop climate policies. IPCC assessments are a key input into the international negotiations to tackle climate change. IPCC reports are drafted and reviewed in several stages, thus guaranteeing objectivity and transparency. About the Seventh Assessment Cycle Comprehensive scientific assessment reports are published every 5 to 7 years. The IPCC is currently in its seventh assessment cycle, which formally began in July 2023 with the elections of the new IPCC and Task Force Bureaus at the IPCC’s Plenary Session in Nairobi.&nbsp; At its first Plenary Session in the seventh assessment cycle &#8211; the 60th Plenary Session in Istanbul, Türkiye, in January 2024 &#8211; the Panel agreed to produce in this cycle the three Working Group contributions to the Seventh Assessment Report (AR7), namely the Working Group I report on the Physical Science Basis, the Working Group II report on Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability and the Working Group III report on Mitigation of Climate Change. The Synthesis Report of the Seventh Assessment Report will be produced after the completion of the Working Group reports and released by late 2029. The Panel decided already during the previous cycle to produce a Special Report on Climate Change and Cities and a Methodology Report on Short-lived Climate Forcers during AR7.. Scientists have also been asked to deliver a Methodology Report on Carbon Dioxide Removal Technologies, Carbon Capture Utilization and Storage. At the IPCC’s&nbsp; 61st Plenary Session held in Sofia, Bulgaria, from 27 July to 2 August 2024, the Panel agreed upon the outlines for the Special Report on Climate Change and Cities scheduled for approval and publication in March 2027 and for the 2027 IPCC Methodology Report on Inventories for Short-lived Climate Forcers scheduled for publication in the second half 2027. The Panel agreed on the outlines of the Working Group contributions to the Seventh Assessment Report during its 62nd Session in February 2025 held in in Hangzhou, China. In addition, a revision of the 1994 IPCC Technical Guidelines on impacts and adaptation as well as adaptation indicators, metrics and guidelines, will be developed in conjunction with the Working Group II report and published as a separate product. IPCC’s latest report, the Sixth Assessment Report, was completed in March 2023 with the release of its Synthesis Report, which provided direct scientific input to the First Global Stocktake process under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change at COP28 in Dubai. The Sixth Assessment Report comprises three Working Group contributions and a Synthesis Report. The Working Group I contribution Climate Change 2021: the Physical Science Basis was released on 9 August 2021. The Working Group II contribution, Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability, was released on 28 February 2022. The Working Group III contribution, Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change, was released on 4 April 2022 and the Synthesis Report on 20 March 2023. The Synthesis Report to the Sixth Assessment Report, distils and integrates the findings of the three Working Group assessments as well as the three Special Reports released in 2018 and 2019. The special reports were on Global Warming of 1.5°C (October 2018.), Climate Change and Land (August 2019) and, the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (September 2019). For more information visit www.ipcc.ch. The website includes outreach materials including videos about the IPCC and video recordings from outreach events conducted as webinars or live-streamed events. Most videos published by the IPCC can be found on our YouTube channel.&nbsp;&nbsp;

[Read original article](https://www.ipcc.ch/2025/10/31/pr-ipcc63-final/)
