---
layout: feed_item
title: "Hurricane Melissa’s destruction shows need for climate resilience push"
date: 2025-10-30 09:20:37 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['sea-level-rise', 'extreme-weather', 'year-2024', 'sahel', 'oceania', 'hurricane', 'pacific-region', 'africa', 'tropical-storms', 'flooding']
keywords: ['sea-level-rise', 'extreme-weather', 'melissa', 'destruction', 'sahel', 'oceania', 'hurricane', 'year-2024']
description: "Avinash Persaud is special advisor to the president of the Inter-American Development Bank on climate change and an architect of the 2022 Bridgetown Initiative"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/10/30/hurricane-melissas-devastation-highlights-need-for-climate-resilience-push/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Avinash Persaud is special advisor to the president of the Inter-American Development Bank on climate change and an architect of the 2022 Bridgetown Initiative.&nbsp;Emily Wilkinson is director of the Resilient and Sustainable Islands Initiative (RESI) at ODI Global. Many communities are vulnerable to climate shocks – from the urban poor in Brazil to smallholder farmers in Africa’s Sahel region. But few are more vulnerable than those living in Small Island Developing States (SIDS) around the world, from the Caribbean to the South Pacific.&nbsp; Storms and rising sea levels present an existential risk. They can wipe out annual incomes several times over. We don&#8217;t yet know the full extent of the damage wrought on Jamaica by Hurricane Melissa &#8211; the strongest hurricane to hit the island since records began &#8211; but they are expected to run into tens of billions of dollars, and recovery will take at least a decade. These nations are the “canaries in the coal mine”, signalling the dangers that lie ahead. In 2022, the world set out a plan to tackle the threat. Economists, nonprofits and nation states got behind the Bridgetown Initiative, spearheaded by Barbadian Prime Minister Mia Mottley.&nbsp; It has historically been difficult and expensive to finance the projects many nations need to cope with our changing climate. Yet much progress has been made on the Bridgetown Initiative’s five-step plan to reform the global financial system.&nbsp; Momentum builds for strong adaptation outcome at COP30 We have seen wider adoption of pause clauses in debt arrangements aimed at taking the pressure off countries when they face disasters. These clauses were used for the first time by Grenada and St. Vincent and the Grenadines in the aftermath of Hurricane Beryl in 2024. In 2023, countries agreed to unlock $100 billion in Special Drawing Rights, an international reserve of assets held by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), scaling up states’ efforts to build resilience to climate change. More recently, progress has been made to reduce the cost of capital and currency volatility, two other major brakes on resilience investments. Brazil, the COP30 host nation, has just launched the Eco Invest programme with the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), which will mobilise significant new private and public finance to restore degraded rural areas, produce clean energy and create green jobs. Closing the yawning climate finance gap These measures have helped to close a yawning climate finance gap, but more action is needed.&nbsp; Global average temperatures continue to rise, and we are close to biophysical tipping points with disastrous consequences.&nbsp; For many climate-vulnerable countries, investing in resilience is the best response. Climate adaptation technologies have improved substantially and countries can now build heat-ready homes and schools, while coastal defences can withstand Category 5 hurricanes like Melissa. Every dollar spent on adaptation saves up to $10 on avoided losses. Oct 29, 2025 News Global South&#8217;s climate adaptation bill to top $300 billion a year by 2035: UN Warning over massive shortfall in climate adaptation funding comes days before COP30 in Brazil, where the issue is set to be a major theme Read more Oct 28, 2025 News UN calls for faster emissions cuts for 2035 as first global estimate disappoints UNFCCC &#8220;calculations&#8221; suggest a 10% drop in global emissions, but delays by many countries in submitting NDCs cloud official review of climate pledges Read more Oct 24, 2025 News Political backing more important than money for new forest fund at COP30, Brazil says The Tropical Forest Forever Facility is seeking $25bn in startup capital from donors but doesn&#8217;t need to hit this goal before its launch in Belém, Brazil&#8217;s finance ministry tells Climate Home event Read more The investments that have the greatest savings tend to be public goods, such as sea walls and flood defences, with few capturable revenues for private investors. The private sector has an important role to play in developing resilience technologies and implementing resilience investments, but 90% of the time, the public sector ends up paying. Many call on rich nations to provide more grant support for the climate vulnerable. But grants are shrinking, so we must consider other ways to unlock more investment. Climate adaptation can’t be just for the rich, COP30 president says First, the major players who influence debt sustainability &#8211; ratings agencies such as Fitch and Moody’s, private investors, the IMF, the World Bank and other multilateral development banks (MDBs) – could change their approach. Too often, the risks of climate shocks are priced into debt repayments without considering the opportunity to gain by making countries more resilient to them. This makes it harder for countries to do the right thing. Second, the most climate-vulnerable nations will need new borrowing instruments that are low-cost, long-term and flexible, for example ensuring that debt interest repayment timings can be adjusted if a disaster such as a devastating hurricane strikes. Because of their AAA credit ratings, MDBs like the World Bank are best positioned to help. Small island nations require an estimated $36 billion for adaptation efforts but received a fraction of that last year, and the World Bank and Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) have committed to raising their adaptation finance portfolio overall to 50% of climate finance, up from 30%. A man walks on a flooded road, after Hurricane Melissa made landfall, in Prospect, Manchester, Jamaica, October 29, 2025. REUTERS/Octavio Jones A man walks on a flooded road, after Hurricane Melissa made landfall, in Prospect, Manchester, Jamaica, October 29, 2025. REUTERS/Octavio Jones Third, climate-vulnerable countries are still paying a huge portion of their tax revenues in servicing debt. More can be done to break this vicious cycle, and one solution is something called a debt-for-resilience swap. That’s when a AAA-rated guarantor guarantees the debt of a climate-vulnerable country, allowing it to borrow at significantly lower interest rates. The proceeds are then used to buy back expensive debt – keeping the level of debt unchanged, but re-routing interest savings for resilience investments. Barbados, the Bahamas and Ecuador have done debt-for-climate swaps, but guarantors are in limited supply. Comment: Can COP30 mark a turning point for climate adaptation? To tackle this challenge, the IDB and other MDBs are developing the first-of-its-kind Multi-Guarantor Debt for Resilience Facility, where multiple guarantors work together to unlock more debt swaps on a larger scale. In these difficult times, when climate change is driving ever more dangerous and unpredictable impacts in vulnerable places, we must press forward with further reforms. Bridgetown has already channelled hundreds of billions into building stable countries with a secure future &#8211; something that benefits all of us. Now we all need to raise our adaptation ambitions. The post Hurricane Melissa&#8217;s destruction shows need for climate resilience push appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/10/30/hurricane-melissas-devastation-highlights-need-for-climate-resilience-push/)
