---
layout: feed_item
title: "IEA: Renewables have cut fossil-fuel imports for more than 100 countries"
date: 2025-10-09 14:41:30 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['renewable-energy', 'clean-energy', 'economic-impacts', 'year-2023', 'solar-power', 'wind-power', 'climate-costs', 'emissions', 'urgent', 'fossil-fuels']
keywords: ['renewable-energy', 'clean-energy', 'fossil', 'economic-impacts', 'year-2023', 'solar-power', 'renewables', 'fuel']
description: "Denmark has cut its reliance on fossil-fuel imports by nearly half over the same period"
external_url: https://www.carbonbrief.org/iea-renewables-have-cut-fossil-fuel-imports-for-more-than-100-countries/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Carbon Brief"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

More than 100 countries have cut their dependence on fossil-fuel imports and saved hundreds of billions of dollars by continuing to invest in renewables, according to the International Energy Agency (IEA). It says nations such as the UK, Germany and Chile have reduced their need for imported coal and gas by around a third since 2010, mainly by building wind and solar power. Denmark has cut its reliance on fossil-fuel imports by nearly half over the same period. Renewable expansion allowed these nations to collectively avoid importing 700m tonnes of coal and 400bn cubic metres of gas in 2023, equivalent to around 10% of global consumption. In doing so, the fuel-importing countries saved more than $1.3tn between 2010 and 2023 that would otherwise have been spent on fossil fuels from overseas. Reduced reliance The IEA’s Renewables 2025 report quantifies the benefits of renewable-energy deployment for electricity systems in fossil fuel-importing nations.&nbsp; It compares recent trends in renewable expansion to an alternative “low renewable-energy source” scenario, in which this growth did not take place. In this counterfactual, fuel-importing countries stopped building wind, solar and other non-hydropower renewable-energy projects after 2010. In reality, the world added around 2,500 gigawatts (GW) of such projects between 2010 and 2023, according to the IEA, more than the combined electricity generating capacity of the EU and US in 2023, from all sources. Roughly 80% of this new renewable capacity was built in nations that rely on coal and gas imports to generate electricity. The chart below shows how 31 of these countries have substantially cut their dependence on imported fossil fuels over the 13-year period, as a result of expanding their wind, solar and other renewable energy supplies. All of these countries are net importers of coal and gas. Share of national electricity supplies that depend on imported fossil fuels in 2023, actual (left) and in the IEA’s “low renewable-energy source” scenario (right), in 31 countries that are net importers of coal and gas. Source: IEA. In total, the IEA identified 107 countries that had reduced their dependence on fossil fuel imports for electricity generation, to some extent due to the deployment of renewables other than hydropower. Of these, 38 had cut their reliance on electricity from imported coal and gas by more than 10 percentage points and eight had seen that share drop by more than 30 percentage points. Security and resilience The IEA stresses that renewables “inherently strengthen energy supply security”, because they generate electricity domestically, while also “improving…economic resilience” in fossil-fuel importer countries.&nbsp; This is particularly true for countries with low or dwindling domestic energy resources. The agency cites the energy crisis exacerbated by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, which exposed EU importers to spiralling fossil-fuel prices. Bulgaria, Romania and Finland – which have historically depended on Russian gas for electricity generation – have all brought their import reliance close to zero in recent years by building renewables. In the UK, where there has been mounting opposition to renewables from right-wing political parties, the IEA says reliance on electricity generated with imported fossil fuels has dropped from 45% to under 25% in a decade, thanks primarily to the growth of wind and solar power.&nbsp; Without these technologies, the UK would now be needing to import fossil fuels to supply nearly 60% of its electricity, the IEA says. Other major economies, notably China and the EU, would also have had to rely on a growing share of coal and gas from overseas, if they had not expanded renewables. As well as increasing the need for fossil-fuel imports from other countries, switching renewables for fossil fuels would require significantly higher energy usage “due to [fossil fuels’] lower conversion efficiencies”, the IEA notes. Each gigawatt-hour (GWh) of renewable power produced has avoided the need for 2-3GWh of fossil fuels, it explains. Finally, the IEA points out that spending on renewables rather than imported fossil fuels keeps more investment in domestic economies and supports local jobs. Q&amp;A: How countries are using biofuels to meet their climate targets Energy | 08.10.25 Analysis: Great Britain has run on 100% clean power for record 87 hours in 2025 so far Renewables | 29.09.25 Analysis: India’s power-sector CO2 falls for only second time in half a century Emissions | 18.09.25 IEA reiterates ‘no new oil and gas needed’ if global warming is limited to 1.5C International policy | 16.09.25 The post IEA: Renewables have cut fossil-fuel imports for more than 100 countries appeared first on Carbon Brief.

[Read original article](https://www.carbonbrief.org/iea-renewables-have-cut-fossil-fuel-imports-for-more-than-100-countries/)
