---
layout: feed_item
title: "COP30 Bulletin Day 7: Brazil outlines options for a possible deal in Belém"
date: 2025-11-17 15:18:16 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['fossil-fuels', 'cop29', 'renewable-energy', 'year-2025', 'emissions', 'economic-impacts', 'climate-policy', 'climate-costs', 'clean-energy', 'paris-agreement']
keywords: ['fossil-fuels', 'cop29', 'renewable-energy', 'year-2025', 'outlines', 'emissions', 'bulletin', 'brazil']
description: "Nothing in that “summary note” has been agreed by countries"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/11/17/cop30-bulletin-day-7-brazil-outlines-options-for-a-possible-deal-in-belem/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Last Monday, to get the COP30 agenda agreed, Brazil promised to hold consultations on four controversial issues: emissions-cutting, transparency, trade and finance. Last night, after most delegates had spent their day off exploring the Amazon, the Presidency released a five-page document summarising what was said in those consultations. Nothing in that “summary note” has been agreed by countries. But it collects together divergent views and forms the basis of what could become a politically agreed statement (known in the jargon as a cover decision) at the end of the COP.&nbsp; It has three key strands on boosting climate finance, strengthening emissions reductions and tackling trade measures linked to decarbonisation. It includes the key rhetorical messages the COP30 presidency wants to include &#8211; that this is a “COP of Truth”, multilateralism is alive (despite President Trump’s efforts to thwart climate action) and the Paris Agreement is now moving from negotiation to implementation. On emissions-cutting and the need to raise ambition &#8211; sorely lacking after the latest round of national climate plans (NDCs) &#8211; the note includes an option to hold an annual review and explore the “opportunities, barriers and enablers” to achieve the global efforts agreed at COP28 in Dubai to triple renewable energy and double energy efficiency by 2030; accelerate action to transition away from fossil fuels; and halt and reverse deforestation. This is essentially where any reference to a roadmap to transition away from fossil fuels could be anchored. Nov 14, 2025 Politics COP30 Bulletin Day 5: COP30 could greenlight work on a fossil fuel transition roadmap At the climate talks in Belém, governments are considering whether to launch a process to craft a roadmap and how that might look Read more Nov 15, 2025 News COP30 Bulletin Day 6: First week ends with a colourful march and much work left to do UN climate chief Simon Stiell tells governments &#8220;to give a little to get a lot&#8221;, as many thorny issues remain for ministers to resolve next week Read more The document also includes proposals to “urge” developed nations to include finance in their NDC climate plans and “encourage” all countries that have set a range of percentage emissions reductions in their NDCs &#8211; like the EU’s 66.25-72.5% &#8211; to move toward the upper end of the range. On finance, options include a three-year work programme on provision of finance by wealthy governments and a goal to triple adaptation finance (something the least-developed countries are pushing for) or just repeating the finance goal agreed at COP29 and “noting” a new roadmap to achieve that (which rich nations very much prefer). There are also various options for how to talk about where climate and trade overlap: an annual dialogue, roundtables, consultations, a new platform or just to keep discussing in the ‘response measures’ strand of climate talks.&nbsp; Li Shuo, head of the Asia Society Policy Institute’s China Climate Hub, told Climate Home News it was highly significant that &#8211; after two years of the issue being buried in climate talks &#8211; trade has now been “anchored in the endgame of this COP”. The various potential outcomes in the summary note could be included in existing agenda items or they could be lumped together into what is usually referred to as a cover text but the Brazilian government would likely prefer to call a “mutirão decision” or a delivery, response or global action plan. Essentially,&nbsp; after governments ignored the presidency’s pleas not to add contentious items to the agenda, it looks like they could get at least some of what they want by&nbsp; turning those issues into the headline deal from COP30 . Simon Stiell speaks to delegates at COP30 o Monday 17 November 2025 (Photo: Kiara Worth/UNFCCC) At the start of the high-level segment of the conference on Monday morning, where environment ministers deliver their speeches, UN climate chief Simon Stiell urged governments “to get to the hardest issues fast”.&nbsp; “When these issues get pushed deep into extra time, everybody loses. We absolutely cannot afford to waste time on tactical delays or stone-walling,&#8221; he added. The presidency consultations on the issues in the note will continue on Monday, along with negotiations on adaptation metrics and a Just Transition Work Programme among others. The COP30 president then plans to convene a “Mutirao” meeting of ministers and heads of delegation on Tuesday “to bring together various outcomes”. Korea joins coal phase-out coalition at COP30 As fossil fuels have grabbed headlines at COP30, major coal producer South Korea kicked off the second week of the Belém conference with an actual concrete pledge: the country will phase out most of its coal power by 2040. Operating the seventh-largest coal fleet in the world, Korea announced on Monday that it will join the Powering Past Coal Alliance (PPCA), an initiative launched in 2017 by the UK and Canada to encourage countries to wean themselves off the planet’s largest source of emissions. Oil and gas exporter Bahrain is another new member. Asian industrial giant Korea said that out of 62 operating coal power plants, it will commit to retiring 40 of them by 2040. The phase-out date of the remaining 22 plants “will be determined based on economic and environmental feasibility”. Korean Minister of Environment Kim Sung-Hwan said at an event announcing the pledge that the country will play a “leading role” in the energy transition. “South Korea is known as a manufacturing powerhouse. Unfortunately renewable energy has taken a low share in our power mix, but going forward we are determined to foster renewable energy industries,” he told journalists. “We will show the world that we can create a decarbonised energy transition.” Asked about a fossil fuel transition roadmap &#8211; an idea floated around by many governments in Belém &#8211; Sung-Hwan said “humanity and all of the governments should work together to achieve a decarbonised green transition”, adding that “COP30 will be an important momentum”. UK climate minister Katie White said Korea was taking an “ambitious step”, and that they can “reap the rewards that we are seeing from our own clean energy transition”. Korea is a major importer of oil and gas. Domestically, it has historically relied on coal for electricity, but the country’s production of the fossil fuel has decreased steadily by 86% in the last 25 years, according to the International Energy Agency (IEA). Their nuclear fleet, on the other hand, has nearly doubled in the same time period. The post COP30 Bulletin Day 7: Brazil outlines options for a possible deal in Belém appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/11/17/cop30-bulletin-day-7-brazil-outlines-options-for-a-possible-deal-in-belem/)
