---
layout: feed_item
title: "DeBriefed 28 November 2025: COP30’s ‘frustrating’ end; Asia floods; UK ‘emergency’ climate event"
date: 2025-11-28 15:11:01 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['extreme-weather', 'heatwave', 'climate-health', 'economic-impacts', 'food-security', 'renewable-energy', 'clean-energy', 'emissions', 'flooding', 'hurricanes']
keywords: ['november', 'debriefed', 'frustrating', 'climate-health', 'economic-impacts', 'extreme-weather', 'food-security', 'heatwave']
description: "&nbsp;An essential guide to the week&#8217;s key developments relating to climate change"
external_url: https://www.carbonbrief.org/debriefed-28-november-2025-cop30s-frustrating-end-asia-floods-uk-emergency-climate-event/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Carbon Brief"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Welcome to Carbon Brief’s DeBriefed.&nbsp;An essential guide to the week&#8217;s key developments relating to climate change. This week ‘Lukewarm’ end to COP30 BYE BELÉM: The COP30 climate talks in Belém ended last weekend with countries agreeing on a goal to “triple” adaptation finance by 2035 and efforts to “strengthen” climate plans, Climate Home News reported. The final deal “fell short on the global transition away from oil, gas and coal”, the outlet said, as Brazil announced that it would bring forward voluntary roadmaps to phase out fossil fuels and deforestation, before the next COP. It was a “frustrating end” for more than 80 countries who wanted a roadmap away from fossil fuels to be part of the formal COP agreement, BBC News said.&nbsp; WHAT HAPPENED?: Carbon Brief published its in-depth analysis of all the key outcomes from COP30, spanning everything from negotiations on adaptation, just transition, gender and “Article 6” carbon trading through to a round-up of pledges on various issues. Another Carbon Brief article summed up outcomes around food, forests, land and nature. Also, Carbon Brief journalists discussed the COP in a webinar held earlier this week.&nbsp; ART OF THE DEAL: The “compromise” COP30 deal – known as the “global mutirão” – “exposed deep rifts over how future climate action should be pursued”, Reuters noted. The “last-ditch” agreement was reached after fossil-fuel wording negotiations between the EU and Saudi Arabia, according to the Guardian. Meanwhile, Carbon Brief revealed the “informal” list of 84 countries said to have “opposed” the inclusion of a fossil-fuel roadmap in the mutirão decision, but analysis of the list exposed contradictions and likely errors.&nbsp; UNITY, SCIENCE, SENSE: The final agreement received “lukewarm praise”, said the Associated Press. Palau ambassador Ilana Seid, who chaired the coalition of small-island nations, told the newswire: “Given the circumstances of geopolitics today, we’re actually quite pleased…The alternative is that we don’t get a decision and that would have been [worse].” UN climate chief Simon Stiell said that amid “denial, division and geopolitics”, countries “chose unity, science and economic common sense”, reported the Press Trust of India.&nbsp; Around the world Floods and landslides killed more than 200 people in Thailand and Indonesia this week, reported Bloomberg. At least 90 people also died in recent floods in Vietnam, said Al Jazeera.&nbsp; New measures to cut energy bills and a “pay-per-mile” electric-vehicle levy were among the announcements in the UK’s budget, said Carbon Brief.&nbsp; The Group of 20 (G20) leaders signed off on a declaration “addressing the climate crisis” and other issues, reported Reuters, which had no input from the US who boycotted last week’s G20 summit in South Africa.&nbsp; Canadian prime minister Mark Carney signed a deal with the province of Alberta “centred on plans for a new heavy oil pipeline”, said the Guardian, adding that Canadian culture minister and former environment minister, Steven Guilbeault, resigned from cabinet over the deal.&nbsp;&nbsp; Greenpeace analysis, covered by Reuters, found that permits for new coal plants in China are “on track to fall to a four-year low” in 2025. 27 The number of hours that COP30 talks went over schedule before ending in Belém last Saturday, making it the 11th-longest UN climate summit on record, according to analysis by Carbon Brief. Latest climate research The risk of night-time deaths during heatwaves increased “significantly” over 2005-15 in sub-Saharan Africa | Science Advances&nbsp; Almost half of climate journalists surveyed showed “moderate to severe” symptoms of anxiety | Traumatology&nbsp; Lakes experienced “more severe” heatwaves than those in the atmosphere over the past two decades | Communications Earth &amp; Environment (For more, see Carbon Brief’s in-depth daily summaries of the top climate news stories on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday.) Captured The key COP30 agreement – termed the “global mutirão” – contained 69 inactive verbs, which require no action from countries, compared to 32 active ones. “Recognises”, “recalls” and “acknowledges” were used far more often than more active verbs, such as “decides”, “calls” and “requests”, showed Carbon Brief analysis. Spotlight Nine warnings from a UK climate and nature ‘emergency’ briefing This week, Carbon Brief’s Orla Dwyer reports from an event where experts and campaigners sounded the alarm bell on climate change and nature loss.&nbsp; Naturalist and broadcaster Chris Packham urged attendees at a climate and nature “emergency briefing” in London yesterday to “listen to the science” on climate change amid a “dangerous wave of misinformation and lies”.&nbsp; The “first-of-its-kind” event heard from nine experts on the links between climate change, nature loss, health, food production, economics and national security.&nbsp; Event host, Prof Mike Berners-Lee from Lancaster University, called for a “World War II level of leadership” to tackle the interconnected crises. Hundreds of people showed up, including Green Party, Labour and Liberal Democrat MPs, leader of the Greens Zack Polanski, musician Brian Eno and actress Olivia Williams. Here is a snapshot of what the nine speakers said in their short, but stark, presentations. Prof Kevin Anderson, professor of energy at University of Manchester Anderson focused on the risks of a warmer world and the sliver of emissions left in the global carbon budget, noting:&nbsp; “We have to eliminate fossil fuels or temperatures will just keep going up.” He urged a “Marshall-style” plan – referencing the 1948 post-war US plan to rebuild Europe – to ramp up actions on retrofitting, public transport and electrification. Prof Nathalie Seddon, professor of biodiversity at University of Oxford Nature is not a “nice to have”, but rather “critical national infrastructure”, Seddon told attendees. She called for the “need to create an economy that values nature”.&nbsp; Prof Paul Behrens, British Academy global professor at University of Oxford Behrens discussed the food security risks from climate change. Impacts such as poor harvests and food price inflation are “barely acknowledge[d]” in agricultural policy, he said.&nbsp; He also emphasised the “unsustainable” land use of animal agriculture, which “occupies around 85% of total agricultural land” in the UK.&nbsp; Prof Tim Lenton, chair in climate change and Earth system science at Exeter University&nbsp;&nbsp; Lenton outlined the “plenty” of evidence that parts of the Earth system are hurtling towards climate tipping points that could push them irreversibly into a new state.&nbsp; He discussed the possibility of the shutdown of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation, which he said could cause -20C winters in London. He also noted positive tipping points, such as momentum that led the UK to stop burning coal for electricity last year. Speakers taking audience questions during the “national emergency briefing” event in London on 27 November. Credit: ZUMA Press, Inc. / Alamy Stock Photo Prof Hayley Fowler, professor of climate change impacts at Newcastle University One in four properties in England could be at risk of flooding by 2050, Fowler said, and winters are getting wetter.&nbsp; She discussed extreme weather risks and listed the impacts of floods in recent years in Germany, Spain and Libya, adding:&nbsp; “These events are not warnings of what might happen in the future. They’re actually examples of what is happening right now.”&nbsp; Angela Francis, director of policy solutions at WWF-UK&nbsp; Francis factchecked several claims made against climate action, such as the high cost of achieving net-zero.&nbsp; She noted that the estimated cost for the UK to achieve net-zero is about £4bn per year, which is less than 0.2% of GDP.&nbsp; Lieutenant general Richard Nugee, climate and security advisor Discussing the risks climate change poses to national security, Nugee said:&nbsp; “Climate change can be thought of as a threat multiplier, making existing threats worse or more frequent and introducing new threats. Climate shocks fuel global instability.”&nbsp; Tessa Khan, environmental lawyer and executive director of Uplift&nbsp; Khan said the rising cost of energy in the UK is “turning into a significant political risk for the energy transition”.&nbsp; She discussed the cost of fossil-fuel dependency and the fact that these fuels cost money to burn, but renewable “input[s], sun or wind [are] free forever”.&nbsp; Prof Hugh Montgomery, professor of intensive care medicine at University College London Montgomery discussed the health and economic benefits of climate actions, such as eating less meat and using more public transport, noting: “The climate emergency is a health emergency – and it’s about time we started treating it as one.”&nbsp; Watch, read, listen WATER WORRIES: ABC News spoke to three Iranian women about the impacts of Tehran’s water crisis amid the “worst drought in 60 years”.&nbsp; CLIMATE EFFORT: The BBC’s Climate Question podcast looked at the main outcomes from COP30 and discussed the “future of climate action” with a team of panelists.&nbsp;&nbsp; CRIMINAL BEHAVIOUR:New Scientist interviewed criminal psychologist Julia Shaw about the psychology behind environmental crimes. Coming up 24 November-5 December: COP20 on international trade in endangered species of wild fauna and flora, Samarkand, Uzbekistan 29-30 November: First part of global youth environment assembly, Nairobi, Kenya&nbsp; 3-4 December: Second round of Egyptian parliamentary elections&nbsp; 5 December: World soil day, global Pick of the jobs Aldersgate Group, head of policy | Salary: £56,650-£66,950 per year. Location: London Ofgem, climate resilience expert | Salary: £61,446-£86,547. Location: Cardiff, Glasgow or London Green Climate Fund, integrity risk management lead | Salary: $171,200. Location: Incheon, South Korea Isles of Scilly Wildlife Trust, project manager – seabird recovery | Salary: Up to £45,000 per year. Location: Isles of Scilly, UK DeBriefed is edited by Daisy Dunne. Please send any tips or feedback to debriefed@carbonbrief.org. This is an online version of Carbon Brief’s weekly DeBriefed email newsletter. Subscribe for&nbsp;free here. COP30 DeBriefed 21 November 2025: ‘Mutirão’ text latest; ‘Roadmaps’ explained; COP finish times plotted COP30 Belém | 21.11.25 COP30 DeBriefed 14 November 2025: Finance and 1.5C loom large at talks; China’s emissions dip; Negotiations explained COP30 Belém | 14.11.25 DeBriefed 7 November 2025: Leaders descend on Belém; UN warns of 1.5C breach; changing roles of climate scientists DeBriefed | 07.11.25 DeBriefed 31 October 2025: Hurricane Melissa strikes Jamaica; Climate plans overshoot 1.5C; Protest crackdowns DeBriefed | 31.10.25 The post DeBriefed 28 November 2025: COP30’s ‘frustrating’ end; Asia floods; UK ‘emergency’ climate event appeared first on Carbon Brief.

[Read original article](https://www.carbonbrief.org/debriefed-28-november-2025-cop30s-frustrating-end-asia-floods-uk-emergency-climate-event/)
