---
layout: feed_item
title: "A tribe in Florida joins the fight against the “Alligator Alcatraz” immigrant detention center"
date: 2025-07-15 19:35:37 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['climate-migration', 'displacement', 'urgent', 'year-2025']
keywords: ['climate-migration', 'tribe', 'year-2025', 'joins', 'displacement', 'urgent', 'florida']
description: "The Miccosukee Tribe in Florida joined environmental groups on Tuesday to sue the federal and state agencies that constructed an immigrant detention center k..."
external_url: https://grist.org/indigenous/a-florida-tribe-joins-the-fight-against-the-alligator-alcatraz-immigrant-detention-center/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Grist"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

The Miccosukee Tribe in Florida joined environmental groups on Tuesday to sue the federal and state agencies that constructed an immigrant detention center known as the “Alligator Alcatraz” and located in the Everglades National Park. In a motion to join a lawsuit, as one of the first tribes to potentially sue against the detention center, the case argues that the Department of Homeland Security, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Miami-Dade County, and the Florida Division of Emergency Management did not seek an environmental review. The filing alleges the center’s proximity to Miccosukee villages, ceremonial sites, and access to traditional hunting grounds, and “raises significant raises significant concerns about environmental degradation and potential impacts.&#8221; “We are going to make sure that we fight this facility on whatever front is available to us,” said William “Popeye” James Osecola, who is the secretary of the Miccosukee tribal council. He hopes the lawsuit will “signify that the tribe will continue fighting to do what it&#8217;s always done, which is protect the land and save the land that saved us.” According to Osecola, since the facility’s operation began, tribal members have been restricted from gathering plants and roots for uses such as medicine. “Obviously, that&#8217;s not an option for us right now,” he said. “At the moment, it&#8217;s the first time we&#8217;ve ever seen gates like that there, so it&#8217;s very jarring for us.”&nbsp; Nearby the facility, 15 active tribal villages reside inside Big Cypress National Preserve, located within the Everglades.&nbsp; During the 19th century, the Seminole Wars, which the Seminole Nation and Miccosukee Nation view as one continuous conflict against the U.S., many members fled into the wetlands and used their natural environment as refuge.&nbsp; Protestors stand outside a makeshift detention center for immigrants known as the “Alligator Alcatraz” as government vehicles drive by, in the Florida Everglades. Betty Osceola In a press conference at the detention center last month, Florida Governor Ron DeSantis said there would be&nbsp; “zero impact” on the wetland’s environment. The site is located on an abandoned airstrip, once a controversial project that aimed to be the world’s largest airport. Observers outside the facility said they could see lights on at all hours, attracting mosquito swarms. Recent satellite images also reveal that a freshly paved road has been laid down.&nbsp; Last year, the tribe and the National Park Service signed a co-stewardship agreement for Everglades National Park. The partnership aimed to collaborate on protecting tribal practices, restoration efforts for the land’s vegetation, and protection.&nbsp; In these cypress swamps and toothy sawgrass marshes, wildlife alongside alligators includes bats, turtles, and panthers. Because species such as the panther are critically endangered, Osecola implied that the continuous traffic at Alligator Alcatraz will “see more deaths with the wildlife”. “It&#8217;s taken decades just to get Everglades restoration going like it is now,” he said. While the Department of Homeland Security distanced itself after promoting the facility for weeks, claiming Florida controls the facility under state hands, critics are not convinced. Elise Bennett, Florida and Caribbean director at the Center for Biological Diversity, an organization that filed alongside Friends of the Everglades in the case last month, noted that “setting aside the funding for detaining immigrants is essentially a federal function. This is a federal project, regardless of what they say in their court filings.” Last week, the Center for Biological Diversity filed a legal notice with an intent to sue that the construction also violates the Clean Water Act and Endangered Species Act, raising concerns such as light pollution and the use of insecticide to mitigate mosquitoes on-site that could affect the area’s wildlife and surrounding water.&nbsp; Each day since its opening, protestors and groups have noticed trucks coming in carrying diesel, generators, and caged vehicles holding detainees. There are currently 3000 beds inside the facility and at least 400 security personnel on-site.&nbsp; After state legislators were blocked from entering the Alligator Alcatraz’s premises, Governor DeSantis invited legislators and the state’s members of Congress to tour the facility over the weekend. According to Osecola, the Governor of Florida did not extend that invitation to tribes. Some Republican members claimed that the detention center was clean and safe. Others, such as Democratic State Representative Anna Eskamani, reported that, “The environmental impact of this facility cannot be overstated — there is new asphalt, thousands of gallons of water used every day and gas tanks powering generators. No alligators seen, but plenty of mosquitoes.” This story was originally published by Grist with the headline A tribe in Florida joins the fight against the &#8220;Alligator Alcatraz&#8221; immigrant detention center on Jul 15, 2025.

[Read original article](https://grist.org/indigenous/a-florida-tribe-joins-the-fight-against-the-alligator-alcatraz-immigrant-detention-center/)
