---
layout: feed_item
title: "Science and Capacity Officer in the IPCC Working Group II Technical Support Unit"
date: 2025-10-10 10:12:13 +0000
categories: [climate_science]
tags: ['climate-migration', 'year-2025', 'ipcc', 'climate-science', 'displacement', 'insurance', 'climate-risk']
keywords: ['climate-migration', 'capacity', 'year-2025', 'ipcc', 'officer', 'climate-science', 'displacement', 'science']
description: "Do you have expertise in scientific capacity building, empowerment and co-creation of scientific products at the international level"
external_url: https://www.ipcc.ch/2025/10/10/science-and-capacity-officer-wg2-tsu/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "IPCC"
feed_category: "climate_science"
---

Working Group II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is filling the position of Science and Capacity Officer Deadline: to apply before November 3, 2025 Help support the authors of the IPCC in their task to deliver the comprehensive and policy-relevant assessment reports. Do you have expertise in scientific capacity building, empowerment and co-creation of scientific products at the international level?&nbsp; We are looking for a dedicated Science and Capacity Officer with strong interpersonal skills. Are you committed to contribute to an inclusive global scientific practice? Please read on!&nbsp; This is what you can expect as a Science and Capacity&nbsp; The Technical Support Unit (TSU) of IPCC Working Group II provides scientific, logistical, and editorial support for researchers who write reports focused on climate change impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability. It coordinates hundreds of authors worldwide. Your goal is to ensure that authors- especially from developing countries and under-resourced environments &#8211; are equipped with the knowledge, tools, and skills needed to deliver high-quality, policy-relevant assessments. It acquires a combination of strategic planning, operational execution (organize and coordinate), and author empowerment. Together with the Chapter Coordinating Lead Authors (CLAs) you will assist in identifying the capacity building needs of authors. You develop custom-made engagement packages for their author teams. Ensuring consistency across chapters while tailoring approaches to diverse scientific, cultural, and regional contexts. This way of working needs to be embedded in the operational and scientific processes in which the authors are engaged.&nbsp; Activities you will organize and coordinate may include: Co-create and implement a strategic capacity building plan with TSU leadership.Facilitate inclusive collaboration across multidisciplinary and multicultural teams ensuring fair participation from all target groups.&nbsp;Identify, align, and operationalize author support activities.&nbsp;Develop and deliver tailored engagement packages for author teams, including training, workshops, coaching, and resources that strengthen skills in literature assessment, scientific writing, collaboration, and time management.Promote a culture of continuous learning and improvement, embedding feedback loops, sharing best practices across chapters, and iterating resources based on authors’ needs. Requirements: Multiple years of professional experience in&nbsp;scientific capacity building, training, or education, ideally in climate science or related fields;Demonstrated&nbsp;operational experience&nbsp;with capacity building principles and tools;Experience with scientific production&nbsp;or assessment;Excellent written and oral&nbsp;communication skills; ability to translate complex scientific knowledge, processes and topics into accessible resources;Strong&nbsp;interpersonal skills&nbsp;to work across diverse cultural and disciplinary backgrounds. Due to the international character of the job, willingness to travel to implement capacity building support at international meetings is a must. Also to have a high degree of stress-resistance to work to deadlines is an asset. About the IPCC Working Group II The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is in its Seventh Assessment cycle. The Working Group II Technical Support Unit (TSU), which provides the scientific, technical and organizational support of the activities and products of the Working Group focusing on the Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability of Climate Change. The TSU is co-located at Deltares in the Netherlands and at the Singapore Management University in Singapore. What we offer&nbsp; This is a fulltime fixed term contract at Deltares for the duration of at least 2.5 years. Parttime contract is negotiable, subject to flexibility and minimum level of commitment. The position is funded by the Dutch government and employment conditions (e.g., renumeration scales, insurance and other benefits) is through Deltares. We offer: The opportunity to work with a motivated and enthusiastic team in an informal work environment with global exposure;Salary will be based on your experience the minimum is €4253,52 and the maximum is € 7.089,20 gross per month based on 40 hours per week;An open, inclusive and collaborative culture;Here&nbsp;you can find more information about our attractive terms of employment. Procedure Apply with your CV and motivation letter before November 3. Applications without a motivation letter will not be reviewed. Interviews will be held on&nbsp;November 18 and 19.&nbsp;Selection may include multiple interviews and evaluation of assignments representative of the support work carried out in the TSU. Starting date: as soon as possible. The position is based in Delft in the Netherlands. Working remotely from another country is not preferred. Questions? Please call Brian de Bruin (Recruitment Officer&nbsp;sollicitatie@deltares.nl&nbsp;+31615267686). Given the ambition for cultural diversity in the TSU applicants from developing countries are particularly encouraged to apply.&nbsp;We assist with the application to the Immigration Service (IND) if you don’t have an EU passport. Together with the Expat Management Group (EMG)&nbsp;we make sure everything is arranged.&nbsp; To apply, click here

[Read original article](https://www.ipcc.ch/2025/10/10/science-and-capacity-officer-wg2-tsu/)
