---
layout: feed_item
title: "COP30 fails to land deal on fossil fuel shift but triples finance for climate adaptation"
date: 2025-11-22 18:10:02 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['amazon', 'urgent', 'year-2025', 'emissions', 'climate-summit', 'cop29', 'rainforest', 'fossil-fuels']
keywords: ['amazon', 'fails', 'urgent', 'deal', 'year-2025', 'land', 'climate-summit', 'emissions']
description: "But the Amazon summit’s outcomes fell short on the global transition away from oil, gas and coal"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/11/22/cop30-brazil-deal-fossil-fuel-transition-fails-triples-finance-climate-adaptation/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

After all-night talks, governments at COP30 agreed on Saturday to launch limited initiatives to strengthen emissions-cutting plans, as well as tripling finance to help poor countries cope with worsening climate change impacts by 2035. But the Amazon summit’s outcomes fell short on the global transition away from oil, gas and coal. In an effort to deliver something on fossil fuels, the Brazilian presidency complemented the final Belém package by promising to create roadmaps on transitioning away from fossil fuels and protecting forests &#8211; as requested by Brazilian President Lula da Silva. Brazil tabled its roadmap proposal at the eleventh hour as a compromise solution after some nations &#8211; especially European and Latin American states &#8211; voiced disappointment that a formal deal was not reached on one after strong pushback from large fossil fuel producers led by Saudi Arabia. Brazil’s roadmap process will sit outside the UN climate regime. It will be supported by other countries such as Colombia, which is organising the first global conference on the issue, said COP30 president André Aranha Corrêa do Lago. He added that he will also craft a second roadmap to halt and reverse deforestation and report back to the COP on them both. “We know some of you had greater ambition for some of the issues at hand,” Corrêa do Lago told a closing plenary. “I will try not to disappoint you.” Nov 21, 2025 News Colombia seeks to speed up a “just” fossil fuel phase-out with first global conference The summit, co-hosted with the Netherlands, aims to help countries work out a fair path to stop using planet-heating oil, gas and coal &#8211; a sticking point at the COP30 talks in Brazil Read more Nov 21, 2025 Politics COP30 Bulletin Day 11: With talks in &#8220;crisis&#8221;, countries urged to unite for a deal Hopes for an ambitious deal fade as talks drag on into Friday night, with rifts over a missing fossil fuel transition roadmap and adaptation finance Read more Nov 20, 2025 News Rich nations push back on calls for new just transition mechanism The Belém Action Mechanism&#8217;s backers say it would fortify efforts to shield workers and communities hurt by fallout from the clean energy shift, but developed countries are resistant to the proposal Read more After week-long row, COP30 fails to mention fossil fuels After more than 80 countries called for a roadmap to phase down oil, coal and gas to be kickstarted at COP30, observers said fossil fuel heavyweights, including Gulf States, Russia and India, had insisted it stay out of the final Global Mutirão decision adopted in Belém, along with any explicit mention of fossil fuels. On Friday, the European Union and the UK had fought hard against that opposition but ultimately had to settle for two new processes that are meant to reinforce ambition and implementation of countries’ national climate plans (NDCs), with reports and a high-level dialogue due next year. Before the final plenary, EU Climate Commissioner Wopke Hoekstra said it had been “an intense and sometimes difficult week and evening&#8221;, adding “we would have liked to have more”. But, he said, “we think we should support [the COP outcome] because at least it is going in the right direction.” The Mutirão text encourages countries ”to strengthen their existing nationally determined contribution at any time with a view to enhancing its level of ambition” and calls on them to accelerate their implementation “while striving to do better collectively and cooperatively”. In a last-minute push, Colombia &#8211; which championed a declaration to transition away from oil, coal and gas &#8211; told the closing plenary the country was “left with no other choice” but to object to the outcome of the dedicated mitigation track on emission-cutting efforts unless a mention to fossil fuels was added. After the presidency tried to dismiss concerns, Colombia insisted and the plenary was suspended. The Colombian delegate calls for the inclusion of fossil fuels in the final decision. Photo: UN Climate Change &#8211; Kiara Worth The Colombian delegate calls for the inclusion of fossil fuels in the final decision. Photo: UN Climate Change &#8211; Kiara Worth Developed countries &#8211; especially the EU &#8211; had felt isolated in their push for stronger language on emission-cutting measures after failing to win vocal support from traditional allies such as the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS) and the Least Developed Countries (LDCs). That was mainly because of Europe’s inability to make a compelling offer on finance for adaptation, negotiators and observers said.&nbsp; “Adaptation COP” triples finance for climate resilience&nbsp; A demand from the world’s poorest nations to triple adaptation finance was agreed, but only by a deadline of 2035 rather than 2030, and without a clear number. However, the main Mutirão decision urges developed countries to increase their collective provision of climate finance for adaptation to the Global South. It also sets up a two-year process on climate finance as well as a high-level ministerial roundtable to discuss progress towards meeting the new climate finance goal agreed last year at COP29. That COP29 goal sets a target for rich nations to provide $300 billion a year for climate action by 2035 &#8211; and the tripling of adaptation finance decided in Belem will be part of this, as the EU had insisted. “It is very clear that we should stand shoulder to shoulder with the poorest nations,” the EU’s climate chief Wopke Hoekstra said before the final conference session began.&nbsp; Some African ministers gave the outcome on adaptation finance a cautious welcome. But many countries &#8211; including the EU, some Latin American states, Switzerland and Canada &#8211; were angry about a text that adopted indicators to measure progress on adaptation efforts. They made interventions rejecting the decision on a new Global Goal on Adaptation (GGA) &#8211; expected to be a flagship outcome at this COP &#8211; which included a rewritten and shortened list of metrics to measure progress on climate resilience originally developed by technical experts. Jiwoh Abdulai, environment minister of Sierra Leone, said they had worked tirelessly to craft a set of indicators that would reflect “lived realities” on the ground, but are now left with “unclear, unmeasurable and &#8211; in many cases &#8211; unusable” ones. “For us, this is not technical, this is about our survival,” he added before the plenary was suspended. COP30 President Andre Correa do Lago in consultations after the closing plenary was suspended. Photo: Ueslei Marcelino/COP30 COP30 President Andre Correa do Lago in consultations after the closing plenary was suspended. Photo: Ueslei Marcelino/COP30 Trade and just transition land wins in Belém deal As the Belem political package was adopted to muted applause from countries, campaigners at the back of the room whooped with joy as the conference approved a decision on just transition. They and developing countries had swung behind a new “Belém Action Mechanism”, intended to serve as a hub to support countries in taking concrete steps to ensure their shift from dirty to clean energy systems is fair and equitable. The Mutirão decision also includes trade, another key issue that was not on the official negotiating agenda, along with long-term climate finance and the gap in emissions-cutting ambition. Annual dialogues will take place at the next three mid-year Bonn sessions on boosting international cooperation on trade &#8211; an emerging economy priority in the context of a carbon levy on imports proposed by the EU.&nbsp; Experts said the inclusion of trade in a COP decision was a big win for China. “For the first time, trade is elevated alongside mitigation and finance as a critical third pillar for climate progress,” said Kate Logan, director of China Climate Hub at the Asia Society Policy Institute, adding that this “is likely to remain a key arena for China’s influence” in the climate regime.&nbsp; The decision reaffirms that “measures taken to combat climate change, including unilateral ones, should not constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction on international trade”. The post COP30 fails to land deal on fossil fuel shift but triples finance for climate adaptation appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/11/22/cop30-brazil-deal-fossil-fuel-transition-fails-triples-finance-climate-adaptation/)
