---
layout: feed_item
title: "Momentum builds for strong adaptation outcome at COP30"
date: 2025-10-15 22:50:11 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['public-health', 'flooding', 'food-security', 'rainforest', 'amazon', 'agriculture', 'climate-health', 'cop29', 'wildfires', 'year-2025']
keywords: ['public-health', 'momentum', 'flooding', 'food-security', 'strong', 'rainforest', 'builds', 'amazon']
description: "While government delegations and civil society representatives at the pre-COP in Brasilia this week had hoped for bigger advances on key topics, one stood ou..."
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/10/15/momentum-strong-adaptation-cop30-brazil-belem-impacts-gga/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

While government delegations and civil society representatives at the pre-COP in Brasilia this week had hoped for bigger advances on key topics, one stood out as winning broad backing for a leap forward at next month’s UN climate summit: adaptation. Efforts to adapt to worsening extreme weather and rising seas have long trailed behind measures to cut planet-heating emissions in terms of political support and funding. But as storms, droughts, floods and extreme heat take an ever-higher toll across the world, that imbalance could shift significantly at COP30 this week’s discussions suggest. COP30 president André Corrêa do Lago told Climate Home that he&#8217;s hoping for an adaptation package to be agreed in Belém, which would include a new goal to measure progress on adaptation and a new target to increase finance for climate resilience in developing countries. &#8220;An adaptation package would be important. I said during a closed-door meeting that I would like for COP30 to be remembered as an adaptation COP,&#8221; Corrêa do Lago said in an interview on the sidelines of pre-COP30. Natalie Unterstell, president of the Brazilian Talanoa Institute, told Climate Home conversations on adaptation showed clear progress. “Practically all delegations mentioned the need to elevate adaptation to a higher political level in Belém,” she said. In Brasilia, which attracted delegations from nearly 70 countries, India said COP30 &#8211; the first UN climate summit to take place in the Amazon &#8211; needs to be a COP of adaptation. Island nation Barbados urged to increase ambition on adaptation, while Palau called for finance for adaptation to be scaled up.&nbsp; The group of Least-Developed Countries (LDCs), meanwhile, reiterated a proposal to triple adaptation financing flows compared to 2022 &#8211; a year in which developed countries provided and mobilised $32.4 billion. “For the first time at the pre-COP, we heard from more countries in favour of this proposal, but it still doesn&#8217;t have the support of everyone, especially not from developed countries,” said Unterstell, who has been following discussions on the topic. Oct 15, 2025 News At pre-COP in Brazil, climate finance roadmap to $1.3 trillion remains hazy Ahead of COP30, Azerbaijan and Brazil provide scant details about a keenly awaited report on how to scale up finance for developing countries Read more Oct 15, 2025 Sponsored Hydrogen beyond the hype: The green fuel&#8217;s narrow but crucial role in a decarbonized economy Enthusiasm for green hydrogen may have faded amid high costs and supply issues – but it will be needed in sectors that cannot be easily electrified Read more Oct 14, 2025 News World failing on goal to halt deforestation by 2030, raising stakes for Amazon COP An annual progress report shows that agriculture and wildfires continue to decimate forests despite a global promise to stop their loss this decade Read more The context for boosting adaptation finance &#8211; which covers only a small share of identified needs &#8211; is difficult, with the US slashing most of its aid under Donald Trump and other key donor countries paring back their development spending amid wars and fiscal pressures. As a result, adaptation finance is expected to decrease and may only reach $26 billion in 2025, according to projections by NGOs Oxfam and the CARE Climate Justice Centre. That would be far short of the estimated $40 billion needed to honour the promise developed countries made four years ago at COP26 in Glasgow to double their adaptation finance from 2019 levels by this year. Concerned about this trend, and the huge gap between the funding on offer and their adaptation needs, poorer countries want Belém to be the moment to set a new and ambitious adaptation financing goal for the coming years.&nbsp;&nbsp; Unterstell said this could be discussed under the Global Goal on Adaptation and, particularly, the Baku Adaptation Roadmap agreed during COP29 to advance progress on the adaptation provisions of the Paris Agreement. Another option could be its inclusion in a text prepared by the presidency called a cover decision, but it’s still unclear if COP30 will end with one, she said.&nbsp; Ministerial consultations held on October 15, 2025, during pre-COP30 in Brasilia. (Photo: Rafa Neddermeyer/COP30 Brasil Amazônia/PR) Decision due on adaptation indicators In Brasilia, there was widespread recognition of the need to complete the Global Goal on Adaptation &#8211; agreed in the Paris accord 10 years ago &#8211; at COP30 by defining the indicators that will guide and monitor adaptation policies in areas such as food production, water and health. After a process that began with nearly 10,000 indicators, countries are now discussing a far shorter potential list of 100 that should be decided upon at COP30. At the closing of the pre-COP, Ana Paula Chantre Luna de Carvalho Pereira, environment minister of Angola and one of the coordinators for the adaptation talks, said there was still work to be done by the end of the month to finalise the indicators, so they “are applicable globally, flexible, and reflective of implementation and progress in all countries”. As coral reefs pass tipping point, ocean protection rises up political agenda At the meetings in Brasilia, some governments expressed the need to quickly finalise the definition of the indicators during the first week of COP30 and leave the second week for talks on more political aspects and implementation.&nbsp; In response, the COP30 president said this could be possible. Civil society representatives were more sceptical, however, because of the differences among countries regarding the indicators, including the total number listed and which are most important. Finance is another likely sticking point.&nbsp; Lucas Di Pietro, policy consultant and former adaptation director at Argentina’s Ministry of Environment, said the indicators are key to translate the political progress into “measurable and comparable results”. “Their development must reflect the diversity of contexts and capabilities, allowing each country to adopt those most relevant to its national reality,” said Di Pietro. “Rather than rushing to approve them, it is important that the final result is balanced and linked to the effective provision of means of implementation, such as finance, technology and capacity-building.” Many countries &#8211; especially some developing ones &#8211; consider it essential to include indicators related to the financing provided by developed countries to developing ones, while others argue that all types of financing should be monitored — including private sector investments. The post Momentum builds for strong adaptation outcome at COP30 appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/10/15/momentum-strong-adaptation-cop30-brazil-belem-impacts-gga/)
