---
layout: feed_item
title: "Analysis: Record UK wildfires have burned an area twice the size of Glasgow in 2025"
date: 2025-08-08 11:01:11 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['wildfires', 'year-2025', 'flooding', 'urgent', 'extreme-weather', 'water-crisis', 'drought']
keywords: ['wildfires', 'year-2025', 'flooding', 'record', 'urgent', 'extreme-weather', 'analysis']
description: "Wildfires have scorched more than 40,000 hectares of land so far this year across the UK – an area more than twice the size of the Scottish city of Glasgow"
external_url: https://www.carbonbrief.org/analysis-record-uk-wildfires-have-burned-an-area-twice-the-size-of-glasgow-in-2025/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Carbon Brief"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Wildfires have scorched more than 40,000 hectares of land so far this year across the UK – an area more than twice the size of the Scottish city of Glasgow.&nbsp;&nbsp; This is already a record amount of land burned in a single year, far exceeding the previous high, Global Wildfire Information System (GWIS) data shows.&nbsp; It is also almost four times the average area burned in wildfires by this stage of the year over 2012-24 – and 50% higher than the previous record amount burned by this time in 2019.&nbsp; The burned area overtook the previous annual record in April, BBC News reported at the time, and has continued to soar in the months since. Major wildfires&nbsp; The chart below shows that UK wildfires in 2025 so far have already burned by far the largest area of land over any calendar year since GWIS records began in 2012. The previous record year was 2019, followed by 2022, while 2024 saw the lowest area size burned.&nbsp; Annual land area burned by wildfires across the UK from 2012 to 2025 (red), alongside the average area burned each year over 2012-24. Source: Global Wildfire Information System. Climate change can increase the risk and impact of wildfires. Warmer temperatures and drought can leave land parched and dry out vegetation, which helps fires spread more rapidly. Climate change is making these types of extreme conditions more likely to occur, as well as more severe.&nbsp;&nbsp; Fire services in England and Wales responded to 564 wildfires from January to June 2025 – an increase from 69 fires in the same period last year, the National Fire Chiefs Council (NFCC) said in a statement in June.&nbsp; Most wildfires in the UK are caused by human activity, whether accidental or deliberate, according to the NFCC. Some common ignition sources are disposable barbecues, lit cigarettes and campfires.&nbsp; Jessica Richter, a research analyst at Global Forest Watch, says that, while fires are also a key part of some ecosystems, climate change is the “major driver behind the increasing fire activity around the globe”. She tells Carbon Brief:&nbsp; “As we see more fires, we’re going to see more carbon being emitted and that’s just going to be, for lack of a better phrasing, adding fuel to the fire.”&nbsp; Examples of 2025 wildfires around Galloway (1) and Inverness (2) in Scotland, and a wildfire in Powys (3) in Wales. Source: FIRMS, MapTiler, OpenStreetMap contributors. The UK has also recorded its highest-ever wildfire emissions this year, according to Copernicus, which was “primarily driven” by major wildfires in Scotland from late June to early July. These were the largest wildfires ever recorded in the country, reported the Scotsman. They “ravaged” land in Moray and the Highlands in the north of the country, the newspaper added.&nbsp; Scotland experienced an extreme wildfire in Galloway Forest Park in April, which was “so intense it could be seen from space”, the Financial Times said.&nbsp; Elsewhere, in April, the Belfast News Letter reported that firefighters tackled almost 150 fires on the Mourne Mountains in Northern Ireland.&nbsp; More recently, BBC News reported that firefighters in Dorset, England received “non-stop” wildfire calls in the first weekend of August, with one blaze “engulf[ing] an area the size of 30 football pitches”.&nbsp; Wildfires have also caused devastation across many parts of Europe in recent weeks – including Albania, Cyprus, France, Greece, Spain and Turkey – as well as in the US and Canada.&nbsp; Media reaction: The 2025 Texas floods and the role of climate change Extreme weather | 10.07.25 Children born in 2020 will face ‘unprecedented exposure’ to climate extremes Attribution | 07.05.25 Two-thirds of global warming since 1990 caused by world’s ‘wealthiest 10%’ Attribution | 07.05.25 Global soil moisture in &#8216;permanent&#8217; decline due to climate change Drought | 27.03.25 The post Analysis: Record UK wildfires have burned an area twice the size of Glasgow in 2025 appeared first on Carbon Brief.

[Read original article](https://www.carbonbrief.org/analysis-record-uk-wildfires-have-burned-an-area-twice-the-size-of-glasgow-in-2025/)
