---
layout: feed_item
title: "America’s biggest offshore wind farm will be online in 6 months"
date: 2025-10-18 13:00:00 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['urgent', 'fossil-fuels', 'renewable-energy', 'economic-impacts', 'hurricane', 'year-2026', 'atlantic-region', 'emissions', 'climate-costs', 'clean-energy']
keywords: ['urgent', 'renewable-energy', 'biggest', 'economic-impacts', 'offshore', 'hurricane', 'america', 'fossil-fuels']
description: "About&nbsp;30&nbsp;miles off the coast of Virginia Beach, Virginia, workers have been building America’s largest offshore wind farm at a&nbsp;breakneck pace"
external_url: https://grist.org/energy/americas-biggest-offshore-wind-farm-will-be-online-in-six-months/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Grist"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

About&nbsp;30&nbsp;miles off the coast of Virginia Beach, Virginia, workers have been building America’s largest offshore wind farm at a&nbsp;breakneck pace. The project will start feeding power to the grid by March — the most definitive start date provided by its developer yet. “First power will occur in&nbsp;Q1&nbsp;of next year,” Dominion Energy spokesperson Jeremy Slayton told Canary Media.&nbsp;​“And we are still on schedule to complete by late&nbsp;2026.” In an August earnings call, Dominion Energy CEO Robert Blue provided a vague window of ​“early 2026” when asked when the 2.6-gigawatt Coastal Virginia Offshore Wind, or CVOW, project would start generating renewable power for the energy-hungry state. As of the end of September, Dominion had installed all&nbsp;176&nbsp;turbine foundations —&nbsp;​“a big, important milestone,” per Slayton. That accomplishment involved pile-driving&nbsp;98&nbsp;foundations into the soft seabed during the five-month stretch when such work is permitted. Good weather helped the work move along quickly, as did the Atlantic Ocean’s&nbsp;unusually quiet hurricane season. Speed is key when building wind projects under the eye of a&nbsp;president who has called turbines&nbsp;​​“ugly” and&nbsp;​​“terrible for tourism” — and who has followed up with attempts to dismantle the industry. Had&nbsp;CVOW&nbsp;not finished foundation installation by the end of this month, turbine construction would have been delayed until next spring. Federal permitting restricts pile-driving to a&nbsp;May-through-October window to protect migrating North Atlantic right whales. Such a&nbsp;delay would have made&nbsp;CVOW&nbsp;more vulnerable to the wrath of the Trump administration, which has already&nbsp;issued stop-work orders&nbsp;to two offshore wind farms under construction. Charybdis, an American-made wind-turbine-installation ship, arrived at Portsmouth Marine Terminal in Virginia on September 17. Dominion Energy But Slayton said the threat of President Donald Trump’s interference doesn’t concern him. CVOW is, after all, 1 of only 2 in-progress offshore wind projects that hasn’t been directly attacked by the president. “Our project has enjoyed bipartisan support from the beginning,” he said, pointing to backing from some of the state’s leading Republicans, including Governor Glenn Youngkin and U.S. Representative Jen Kiggans. Kiggans, who represents the politically moderate Virginia Beach area, brought her concerns about Trump’s escalating war on wind to the House floor last month, when Congress returned from recess. She called CVOW ​“important to Virginia,” and House Speaker Mike Johnson, a Republican from Louisiana, later told reporters that he relayed Kiggans’ message directly to Trump. “I understand the priority for Virginians and we want to do right by them, so we’ll see,” Johnson told Politico​’s E&amp;E News, in a comment that broke from an anti–offshore wind narrative that’s taken root among many of his fellow House Republicans. The project is crucial for helping the state meet a&nbsp;deluge of new electricity demand, as Virginia is&nbsp;at the center of the nationwide boom&nbsp;in data-center construction.&nbsp;CVOW&nbsp;will provide a&nbsp;huge amount of carbon-free power to the state and Dominion, its largest utility — helping both keep pace with rising demand without having to burn more polluting fossil fuels. Kiggans also tied the success of&nbsp;CVOW&nbsp;to the needs of Virginia’s military installations. Read Next As Trump champions fossil fuels, the world is betting on renewable energy Zoya Teirstein “I always speak about that project in light of the national security benefit and that benefit to Naval Air Station Oceana,” Kiggans said last month in an&nbsp;interview with&nbsp;WAVY, a&nbsp;Virginia news station, noting that a&nbsp;partnership with Dominion is&nbsp;​“giving Naval Air Station Oceana a $500&nbsp;million power grid upgrade.” Dominion has already spent $6&nbsp;billion on the monumental effort to build&nbsp;CVOW, which has been&nbsp;12&nbsp;years in the making. Almost $1&nbsp;billion of that investment has flowed to the local economy, creating&nbsp;802&nbsp;full- and part-time jobs in the state’s Hampton Roads region, according to G.T. Hollett, Dominion Energy’s director of offshore wind. CVOW’s benefits are being felt nationwide too. “The project has already created&nbsp;2,000&nbsp;direct and indirect American jobs and generated $2&nbsp;billion in economic activity, strengthening the nation’s manufacturing supply chains and our regional economy,” said Katharine Kollins, president of Southeastern Wind Coalition. Now Dominion will turn to the final phase of construction: turbine installation. The work is made possible by Charybdis — the first U.S.-built, Jones Act–compliant wind-turbine installation vessel — which arrived in Virginia’s Portsmouth Marine Terminal last month. “When Charybdis is loaded up, it will have all the components to install four turbines with each trip,” said Slayton, who noted that the pace of the build is well timed given Virginia’s data center boom. The state is facing ​“record growth and energy demand … maybe you’ve heard.” This story was originally published by Grist with the headline America’s biggest offshore wind farm will be online in 6 months on Oct 18, 2025.

[Read original article](https://grist.org/energy/americas-biggest-offshore-wind-farm-will-be-online-in-six-months/)
