---
layout: feed_item
title: "COP30: Brazil is drying up despite its rich natural resources"
date: 2025-11-07 13:51:37 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['public-health', 'rainforest', 'hurricanes', 'amazon', 'climate-health', 'atlantic-region', 'economic-impacts', 'urgent', 'heatwave', 'climate-costs']
keywords: ['public-health', 'rainforest', 'despite', 'hurricanes', 'climate-health', 'amazon', 'brazil', 'drying']
description: "To many people, Brazil conjures up images of the endless Amazon River, lush tropical rainforest and breathtaking wildlife"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/11/07/cop30-brazil-is-drying-up-despite-its-rich-natural-resources/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

To many people, Brazil conjures up images of the endless Amazon River, lush tropical rainforest and breathtaking wildlife. In a country of its size, this picture can remain true while also containing a more complex and changing set of realities.For example, climate change, high water demand and human activity are also leading to increased desert-like conditions. One recent study found that in the past 30 years, there has been a 30% expansion in dryland habitat across Brazil. One of the most affected areas includes the state of Pará, a major part of the Amazon rainforest and home to Belém, which is hosting this year’s UN climate summit. Water shortages Brazil’s northeast region is particularly noted for its semi-arid landscape and water scarcity. Pernambuco, a small state by Brazilian standards, extends from the eastern Atlantic coast into the region’s interior for around 450 miles. Water availability is a constant concern for many communities across the state, especially family farms which are significant contributors to the regional economy. “One of the main problems people are facing here is the growing frequency of droughts and the irregularity of rainfall. As a result, producing food has become extremely difficult,” said Carlos Magno, a coordinator at Centro Sabiá, a non-profit organisation in the area. “We’re also experiencing stronger heatwaves, which have been causing the death of many trees and affecting the local environment even more,” Magno added. Giving nature breathing room builds climate resilience He went on to describe how family farming in the region is almost entirely dependent on rain to grow food. There are no irrigation systems or wells to support communities so when the rains fail, it means less food on the table.Addressing these concerns is a key objective of an ongoing project supported by the Adaptation Fund’s Climate Innovation Accelerator (AFCIA), administered by the UN Development Programme and carried out by Centro Sabiá. A woman collects rainwater harvested for use on smaller agroforestry plots. (Image: Centro Sabiá) A woman collects rainwater harvested for use on smaller agroforestry plots. (Image: Centro Sabiá) Transforming lives Centro Sabiá has an intimate knowledge of how family farming operates in the region. It spent time consulting with communities to better understand their concerns, and hearing their ideas on how to combat water scarcity. The project is implementing simple, yet affordable, climate solutions which are improving the livelihoods of local people.&nbsp;One intervention being explored is to recycle wastewater to help with the growth of new agroforestry plots. The water &#8211; taken from washing or cleaning &#8211; is filtered and then redirected for use on plots that combine crop farming with tree planting. The technique is designed to improve soil health, cut pollution and improve biodiversity. “The water that used to pollute the soil now nourishes crops and trees,” added Magno. “When people realise that their available water is limited, but they can reuse it to grow food, it changes everything.&#8221; On the project, 130 families, totalling over 31,000 people, introduced greywater reuse across 30 new agroforestry plots. The systems are low-cost and simple to implement within a farm’s existing infrastructure. They can be used for years with the initial access to technical support, and, as a result, are now treating millions of litres of water each year. The impacts in Pernambuco have been immediate. Each family is estimated to be saving US$350 a year on water, and earning over US$300 a month from selling agroforestry products. Making farming greener Agroforestry has been identified as a sustainable alternative to industrial farming.&nbsp; According to some scientists, the Amazon rainforest is able to recycle up to 5 litres of water per square metre a day. By contrast, land used for pasture is only able to recycle 1.5 litres. This helps to explain why some previously biodiverse areas that have been converted for cattle ranching and farming are now becoming drier. Agroforestry seeks to redress the balance by including trees in the agricultural process, bringing more moisture &#8211; and carbon &#8211; back into the soil. The response to these techniques from people across Pernambuco has so far been overwhelmingly positive. “Nature is doing really well for us,” reported Cilene, a local participant in the project. In a recent interview with the Adaptation Fund, she explained how in the past, “we bought things with pesticides. Now with this project we are learning to have better, healthier food.” “Compared to how we were living before, we see better results and sustainable benefits,” she added. How Vanuatu is facing up to rising climate risks Francisca Ferraz de Aquino Silva, a farmer in Calumbi, agrees. “This project was a real turning point in my life,” she said. “After the technology arrived, I realised it was possible to make better use of water, without waste, and to produce food while improving the soil. It was a new opportunity in my life,” she told Centro Sabiá. “Agroforestry reduces the need for heavy labour. You work without much effort, it brings economic return, and nature works in your favour&#8230;I saw that it was possible to live in semi-arid conditions with dignity and prosperity &#8211; planting biodiversity and working with agroforestry systems,” she added. One of the greywater reuse systems installed during the project. (Image:Centro Sabiá) One of the greywater reuse systems installed during the project. (Image:Centro Sabiá) What this means for COP30 As heads of state discuss the state of the planet in Belém, they only need look around at the surrounding rainforest to see how vital a role it plays. Human development and extreme weather are putting significant pressure on nature and people’s livelihoods. If these drier conditions persist, the rainforest could be turned into savannah, which some scientists believe will create further dry weather and drought. But the lessons from Belém&#8217;s southerly neighbour over in Pernambuco could provide an answer. Five big questions hanging over COP30 “Policymakers and delegates attending COP30 have a lot to learn from the project,” commented Magno. “It was built with civil society. It was carried out with the contribution of organisations and people who work every day with local communities.” “By the end of the [climate] conference, the decisions and commitments must truly guarantee that adaptation resources reach the communities that are struggling every day to adapt to climate change,” he continued. “It is crucial for funds from international climate agreements and adaptation policies to reach the local level, where they are needed the most.” Adam Wentworth is a freelance writer based in Brighton, UK The post COP30: Brazil is drying up despite its rich natural resources appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/11/07/cop30-brazil-is-drying-up-despite-its-rich-natural-resources/)
