---
layout: feed_item
title: "USDA abruptly cancels rural energy grant application window"
date: 2025-07-17 08:30:00 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['economic-impacts', 'solar-power', 'year-2023', 'food-security', 'wind-power', 'agriculture', 'urgent', 'renewable-energy', 'climate-costs']
keywords: ['economic-impacts', 'solar-power', 'food-security', 'wind-power', 'cancels', 'usda', 'year-2023', 'abruptly']
description: "He’s seen it serve as an economic lifeline for small farmers, especially the state’s poultry producers who operate on thin profit margins"
external_url: https://grist.org/food-and-agriculture/usda-abruptly-cancels-rural-energy-grant-application-window/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Grist"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

For over two decades, Bruce Everly has been helping Indiana farmers apply for funding from the federal Rural Energy for America Program, which provides grants for solar, wind, energy-efficiency upgrades, grain dryers, biodigesters, and other projects in rural America. He’s seen it serve as an economic lifeline for small farmers, especially the state’s poultry producers who operate on thin profit margins. But the program, known as&nbsp;REAP, has faced a&nbsp;series of setbacks under the Trump administration. Nearly $1&nbsp;billion in funding was frozen for months, farmers have heard nothing about applications filed last fall — and now a&nbsp;window for new applications that was supposed to open July&nbsp;1&nbsp;was closed at the last minute. Meanwhile, the most common use case for&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;grants, helping farmers install solar, is under direct threat from the administration. A&nbsp;recent U.S. Department of Agriculture document outlining its&nbsp;Make Agriculture Great Again&nbsp;agenda says that, going forward,&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;​“will disincentivize funding for solar panels on productive farmland.” The&nbsp;2022&nbsp;Inflation Reduction Act infused&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;with&nbsp;over $2&nbsp;billion, but those funds will soon run out, meaning the program will likely revert to the lower funding level of $50&nbsp;million per year ensured by the current iteration of the federal Farm&nbsp;Bill. Read Next The USDA is unfreezing clean energy money — but ‘inviting’ grant recipients to remove DEI and climate language Ayurella Horn-Muller &#038; Izzy Ross “We’re not looking at an IRA-like opportunity for&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;again any time soon,” said Lloyd Ritter, founder of the clean-energy policy consultancy Green Capitol. He helped draft the original&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;program as senior counsel for former Sen. Tom Harkin (D-Iowa). A slowdown in&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;funding would be a&nbsp;blow to the thousands of American farmers who use the program nationwide, forcing them to spend more money to meet their energy needs. And the efforts to block&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;funds from solar projects in particular would both stymie the growth of clean energy in rural areas and hamper what’s become a&nbsp;key source of income for farmers. “This program has been key to helping people who don’t have a&nbsp;lot of assets make a&nbsp;change and provide some cash flow for their family,” said Everly, who has assisted with&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;grants to turn manure into biofuel, grow vegetables year-round in indoor enclosures, and add&nbsp;​“desperately needed” energy efficiency to poultry barns. A boon and&nbsp;bust The&nbsp;2002&nbsp;Farm Bill&nbsp;created the program now known as&nbsp;REAP; it was given its current name under the&nbsp;2008&nbsp;Farm&nbsp;Bill. For more than two decades, the program has offered loan guarantees and grants to farmers and rural small businesses, as well as doled out grants to organizations that provide applicants with technical assistance. Under the Farm Bill, REAP grants reimbursed recipients for up to a quarter of a project’s cost. The IRA increased reimbursement to up to 50 percent of a project’s cost. USDA data shows that more than $1 billion in IRA REAP funding was awarded in over 6,800 grants to farmers and rural small businesses between fiscal year 2023 and the first quarter of fiscal year 2025, according to an analysis by the Environmental Law &amp; Policy Center, with 80 percent of the grants going to Republican House districts. Congress allocated&nbsp;IRA&nbsp;funds for&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;applications through&nbsp;2031, though the funding will likely run out long before then. Federal data shows that about half of&nbsp;IRA&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;funds have already been obligated. Read Next Congress is killing clean energy tax credits. Here&#8217;s how to use them before they disappear. Tik Root President Donald Trump froze&nbsp;over $911&nbsp;million in&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;funds&nbsp;with his Day&nbsp;1&nbsp;executive order targeting&nbsp;IRA&nbsp;programs. His administration lifted the freeze in late March and has yet to make another attempt at clawing back already-promised&nbsp;IRA&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;funds, as some advocates had feared would happen — especially for solar projects. Nonetheless, farmers and experts who monitor the program wonder whether expected grant payments will be disbursed or new applications accepted in coming months, and whether farmers will still trust the program after this period of chaos. REAP&nbsp;grants are administered through reimbursement, meaning uncertainty is particularly harmful. Farmers and other recipients make significant up-front investments with their own money under the assumption that the government will honor its commitment to pay them&nbsp;back. “This year, since Jan.&nbsp;20, has been incredible levels of stress for people who did not understand if they would ever get paid for work where they have already put down millions of dollars on projects,” said Everly. “No matter what the government does, the harvest happens at the same time every year. Farmers had made investments with hope of help from the government, and there’s great uncertainty right&nbsp;now.” A window closed On June&nbsp;30, the&nbsp;USDA&nbsp;released a&nbsp;statement&nbsp;saying that the fiscal year&nbsp;2026&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;application period that was supposed to run from July&nbsp;1&nbsp;to Sept.&nbsp;30&nbsp;would not happen. “This decision was made due to the overwhelming response and continued popularity of the program resulting in a&nbsp;backlog of applicants,” the brief statement says. The&nbsp;USDA&nbsp;said it&nbsp;​“anticipates” accepting applications again starting Oct.&nbsp;1. Meanwhile, the agency has yet to announce decisions on applications submitted last fall, farmers and the advocates who help them with&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;applications told Canary Media. Usually, farmers and technical assistance organizations feel fairly confident that a&nbsp;strong proposal will receive an award, and many made plans expecting to receive funding, Everly said. Now, they are unsure. Kevin Carter/Getty Images REAP&nbsp;only reimburses projects that were started after the application was submitted, so many farmers planning to apply this round had postponed breaking ground on projects until after July&nbsp;1, Everly said. But with the sudden delay, they must now choose to either move forward without&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;funding or kick needed upgrades down the road once&nbsp;more. The number of&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;award decisions is indeed down significantly this year, according to an analysis by the Environmental Law&nbsp;&amp;&nbsp;Policy Center. Federal data obtained by the group through a&nbsp;public records request shows the&nbsp;USDA&nbsp;obligated money for just over&nbsp;1,900&nbsp;grant and loan guarantees between the start of this fiscal year and July&nbsp;9; almost&nbsp;2,400&nbsp;obligations were made during the same period last year. While the money awarded for grants so far this year is only slightly less than last year, the dollars for loan guarantees are drastically lower. Everly was hired by the Indiana state government to help farmers file&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;applications in the program’s early days, then founded a&nbsp;firm now staffed by his wife and more than a&nbsp;dozen employees. His company,&nbsp;EIM&nbsp;LLC, had seven people working full time on&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;applications over the past three months in anticipation of the July&nbsp;1&nbsp;application window. They only get paid once projects come to fruition.&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;data from the&nbsp;USDA&nbsp;shows that the company was awarded five grants for $100,000&nbsp;each in fiscal year&nbsp;2023, but has received only about $25,000&nbsp;thus&nbsp;far. Everly said his firm has a 92 percent success rate in applications, so the wait for payment is not usually a problem. But now he’s uncertain if the 3,000 hours of staff time spent on this latest round of applications will ever be compensated. “We don’t know if we’ll ever get paid for any of the work we did,” said Everly, whose family also owns two farms in the state, one going back seven generations. He said his firm can survive the possible financial setback, but many farmers are working on tighter margins.&nbsp;​“We’ve helped a&nbsp;lot of people who really need the help” from&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;funds. A rollercoaster The canceled July application window was just the latest disruption in what’s been a&nbsp;chaotic year for&nbsp;REAP. On March&nbsp;26,&nbsp;USDA&nbsp;sent a&nbsp;cryptic letter&nbsp;to&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;and other rural agriculture grant recipients noting that the funding freeze was over, and they had&nbsp;30&nbsp;days to&nbsp;​“voluntarily” alter their applications to remove&nbsp;​“any harmful [Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Accessibility] project features” or to use&nbsp;​“more affordable and effective energy sources.” The letter indicated grants would be paid even without changes. Amanda Pankau, director of energy and community resiliency at the environmental nonprofit Prairie Rivers Network, said REAP recipients her organization works with in Illinois were alarmed by the freeze and then confused by the letter, especially since switching to an energy source other than solar wasn’t an option, and most projects did not have DEIA components. Indeed, federal data shows that over the past decade, 82 percent of REAP grants went to recipients identified as white, and 75 percent went to men or businesses owned by men. “The federal freeze and policy chaos, including the confusion surrounding the March&nbsp;26&nbsp;letter, created real distress for Illinois’ farmers and rural small businesses,” Pankau said.&nbsp;​“We know that rural farmers and small business owners are already managing intense stress and thin profit margins. Many don’t have the privilege of a&nbsp;financial cushion to absorb months of federal uncertainty for clean energy projects that were already awarded or underway.” Read Next ‘A self-inflicted tragedy’: Congress approves reversal of US climate policy Joseph Winters In mid-April, a&nbsp;federal judge ruled that the&nbsp;USDA&nbsp;must&nbsp;pay out billions of dollars promised under the&nbsp;IRA, including from&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;and other clean energy programs such as Empowering Rural America, Powering Affordable Clean Energy, and Partnership for Climate-Smart Commodities. The following week, on April 25, three congressional Democrats from Minnesota — Sens. Amy Klobuchar and Tina Smith, along with Rep. Angie Craig — sent a letter to the USDA demanding answers about REAP funds that appeared to still be frozen. The tumult has had lasting impacts on farmers, technical assistance organizations, and solar developers, multiple sources told Canary Media. “People are being whipsawed out there, who are just trying to use the program to install clean energy and cut energy waste,” said Andy Olsen, senior policy advocate for the Environmental Law&nbsp;&amp;&nbsp;Policy Center. Tim Biello is the owner and manager of Featherbed Lane Farm, a&nbsp;regenerative farm supplying community-supported agriculture in upstate New York. He learned in January that he had received&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;funding for a&nbsp;30-kilowatt, $115,000&nbsp;solar project. After the freeze, he wondered whether he should really start the project, since he can’t afford it without&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;reimbursement. Crops at Featherbed Lane Farm in upstate New York. Courtesy of Featherbed Lane Farm “I got awarded, which was awesome news,” said Biello in May.&nbsp;​“Then we got the notice it was frozen. The solar company was just about to put a $50,000&nbsp;to $75,000&nbsp;order for panels. We canceled that; the advice was not to proceed unless you can take it on with no reimbursement.” Biello said at the time that he assumed he would get the promised payment,&nbsp;​“but I&nbsp;don’t feel like anything now is guaranteed, even if you have a&nbsp;signed contract with the government.” Ultimately, Biello decided to install the solar project this summer, after learning the funds were unfrozen and consulting with advisers. In early July, he could finally take a breath of relief: The USDA officially reimbursed him. Farmers in Iowa have similar trepidation, according to Mike Brummer, sales manager at Eagle Point Solar, an installer that counts&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;grantees among its customers. “We’re at this point trying to treat it as business as usual. Let’s keep talking about the project, moving forward with the necessary items,” Brummer said.&nbsp;​“I joke I’ll check my Twitter account at&nbsp;2&nbsp;a.m. for an update.” He said many farmers can only do solar projects with the help of&nbsp;REAP. “The&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;grant can make or break a&nbsp;project, especially for a&nbsp;small farmer or small business,” he said.&nbsp;​“For farmers, every penny has a&nbsp;name on it before it hits the bank. The more pennies you can save, the more chance you have of enduring as a&nbsp;farm and being able to go to the next generation.” The future Everly has three wishes for REAP going forward: clarity on the status of application windows and the program’s future; full funding through the Farm Bill, so that 50 percent reimbursement can continue; and staff support from the USDA. “Is it 25 percent or 50 percent [reimbursement], and are the application deadlines real or imaginary?” he said. With sweeping cuts to the federal workforce, it can be hard to reach someone in the&nbsp;USDA&nbsp;with questions or concerns about the program or an application, he&nbsp;added. Read Next Trump’s tax bill could be a major win for Big Ag. Everyone else? Not so much. Ayurella Horn-Muller Given the turmoil of the past six months, Everly and others are worried that farmers won’t trust&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;as a&nbsp;resource even if the&nbsp;USDA&nbsp;takes applications again. Everly noted that the average farmer only has about&nbsp;40&nbsp;harvest seasons in their life, and with so many resources sunk into each season, they can’t afford to take many&nbsp;risks. “Any time you create uncertainty,” farmers will be dissuaded, he said.&nbsp;​“They only get to run this experiment&nbsp;40&nbsp;times in their life. If you messed up two of them, it’s hard to get their faith back. One mistake and you’ve lost multiple generations of wealth.” Ritter at Green Capitol shares Everly’s concern about federal layoffs impacting&nbsp;REAP. In May,&nbsp;Agriculture Secretary Brooke Rollins told lawmakers&nbsp;that the&nbsp;USDA&nbsp;was trying to fill critical positions after more than&nbsp;15,000&nbsp;agency employees took buyouts aimed at reducing the federal workforce. “My biggest fear is the staffing cuts at&nbsp;USDA&nbsp;will hurt program implementation and efficiency and speed,” Ritter said.&nbsp; He emphasized the bipartisan support that&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;has long enjoyed, and said he hopes and expects that popularity will help the program weather tough&nbsp;times. “REAP&nbsp;just makes sense,” said Ritter.&nbsp;​“The vast bulk of applicants are farmers, ranchers, [and] rural small businesses using it to help lower energy costs and build energy dominance in rural America. Despite unfair and unreasonable attacks from the far right, I&nbsp;think&nbsp;REAP&nbsp;will be&nbsp;OK.”&nbsp; This story was originally published by Grist with the headline USDA abruptly cancels rural energy grant application window on Jul 17, 2025.

[Read original article](https://grist.org/food-and-agriculture/usda-abruptly-cancels-rural-energy-grant-application-window/)
