---
layout: feed_item
title: "New England kicks off $450M plan to supercharge heat pump adoption"
date: 2025-11-29 14:00:00 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['wind-power', 'renewable-energy', 'year-2023', 'emissions', 'urgent', 'fossil-fuels']
keywords: ['wind-power', 'renewable-energy', 'year-2023', 'england', 'emissions', 'kicks', 'plan', 'urgent']
description: "“It’s a big deal,” said Katie Dykes, commissioner of Connecticut’s Department of Energy and Environmental Protection"
external_url: https://grist.org/energy/new-england-kicks-off-450m-plan-to-supercharge-heat-pump-adoption/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Grist"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

New England winters can get wicked cold. This week, five of the region’s states launched a $450 million effort to warm more homes in the often-frigid region with energy-efficient, low-emission heat pumps instead of by burning fossil fuels. “It’s a big deal,” said Katie Dykes, commissioner of Connecticut’s Department of Energy and Environmental Protection. ​“It’s unprecedented to see five states aligning together on a transformational approach to deploying more affordable clean-heat options.” The New England Heat Pump Accelerator is a&nbsp;collaboration between Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island. The initiative is funded by the federal Climate Pollution Reduction Grants program, which was created by President Joe Biden’s&nbsp;2022&nbsp;Inflation Reduction Act. The accelerator’s launch marks a&nbsp;rare milestone for a&nbsp;Biden-era climate initiative amid the Trump administration’s relentless attempts to scrap federal clean energy and environmental programs. The goal: Get more heat pumps into more homes through a&nbsp;combination of financial incentives, educational outreach, and workforce development. New England is a&nbsp;rich target for such an effort because of its current dependence on fossil-fuel heating. Natural gas and propane are in wide use, and heating oil is still widespread throughout the region; more than half of Maine’s homes are heated by oil, and the other coalition states all use oil at rates much higher than the national average. The prevalence of oil in particular means there’s plenty of opportunity to grow heat-pump adoption, cut emissions, and lower residents’ energy bills. Read Next Installing heat pumps in factories could save $1.5 trillion and 77,000 lives Matt Simon At the same time, heat pumps have faced barriers in the region, including the upfront cost of equipment, New England’s high price of electricity, and misconceptions about heat pumps’ ability to work in cold weather. “There’s not a&nbsp;full awareness that these cold-temperature heat pumps can handle our winters, and do it at a&nbsp;cost that is lower than many of our delivered fuels,” said Joseph DeNicola, deputy commissioner of Connecticut’s Department of Energy and Environmental Protection. To some degree, the momentum is shifting. Maine has had notable success,&nbsp;hitting its aim&nbsp;of&nbsp;100,000&nbsp;new heat pump installations in&nbsp;2023, two years ahead of its initial deadline. Massachusetts is on track to reach its&nbsp;2025&nbsp;target, but needs adoption rates to rise in order to make its&nbsp;2030&nbsp;goal. The accelerator aims to speed up adoption by supporting the installation of some&nbsp;580,000&nbsp;residential heat pumps, which would reduce carbon emissions by&nbsp;2.5&nbsp;million metric tons by&nbsp;2030&nbsp;— the equivalent of taking more than&nbsp;540,000&nbsp;gas-powered passenger vehicles off the&nbsp;road. The initiative is organized into three program areas, or&nbsp;​“hubs,” as planners called them during a&nbsp;webinar kicking off the accelerator this&nbsp;week. The largest portion of money, some $270&nbsp;million, will go to the&nbsp;​“market hub.” Distributors will receive incentives for selling heat pumps. They will keep a&nbsp;small percentage of the money for themselves and pass most of the savings on to the contractors buying the equipment. The contractors, in turn, will pass the lower price on to the customers. In addition to reducing upfront costs for consumers, this approach is designed to shift the market by encouraging distributors to keep the equipment in stock, therefore making it an easier choice for contractors and their customers. Read Next 10 charts prove that clean energy is winning — even in the Trump era Umair Irfan, Vox, Benji Jones, Adam Clark Estes, &#038; Sam Delgado, Vox These midstream incentives are expected to reduce the cost of cold-climate air-source heat pumps by $500&nbsp;to $700&nbsp;per unit and heat-pump water heaters by $200&nbsp;to $300&nbsp;per unit. When contractors buy the appliances, the incentive will be applied automatically — no extra paperwork or claims process required. “It should be very simple for contractors to access this funding,” said Ellen Pfeiffer, a senior manager with Energy Solutions, a clean energy consultancy that is helping implement the program. ​“It should be almost seamless.” Consumers will also remain eligible for any incentives available through state efficiency programs, such as rebates from Mass Save or Efficiency Maine, but will likely not be able to stack the accelerator benefits with federal incentives like the Home Efficiency Rebates and Home Electrification and Appliances Rebate programs. Program planners expect to be finalizing the incentive levels through the end of the year, enrolling and training distributors in the early months of&nbsp;2026, and making the first participating products available in February&nbsp;2026, said New England Heat Pump Accelerator program manager Jennifer Gottlieb Elazhari. The second program area is the innovation hub. Each state will receive $14.5 million to fund one or two pilot programs testing out new ways to overcome barriers to heat pump adoption by low- and moderate-income households and in disadvantaged communities. One state might, for example, create a lending library of window-mounted air-source heat pumps, allowing someone whose oil heating breaks down all the time to research replacement options rather than just installing new oil equipment. The innovation hub will also include workforce development and training. Organizers are talking with contractors and other partners to figure out where the gaps are in heat pump training. In the first few months of&nbsp;2026, they will develop a&nbsp;program with a&nbsp;target start date in&nbsp;April. The goal will be not only to ensure that there are tradespeople with the needed skills to install the systems, but also to lay the groundwork for faster adoption by spreading knowledge about the capabilities of the technology and the available incentives. The third major area of the accelerator is a&nbsp;resource hub to aggregate information for contractors, distributors, program implementers, and other stakeholders. Overall, organizers hope to have all three hubs operational in spring&nbsp;2026. Accelerator planners expect programs to boost adoption even as a federal tax credit of up to $2,000 on heat pumps and heat-pump water heaters is phased out at the end of the year, leaving states to lead the way on clean energy action. “At the state level, this is one example of a&nbsp;way we are helping to make progress in reducing greenhouse gas emissions, but with a&nbsp;solution that can help people take control of their energy costs,” Dykes said.&nbsp;​“That’s really what we’re focused on.” This story was originally published by Grist with the headline New England kicks off $450M plan to supercharge heat pump adoption on Nov 29, 2025.

[Read original article](https://grist.org/energy/new-england-kicks-off-450m-plan-to-supercharge-heat-pump-adoption/)
