---
layout: feed_item
title: "How climate change may be affecting tornadoes"
date: 2025-07-07 08:00:00 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['wind-power', 'antarctica', 'year-2025', 'fossil-fuels', 'hurricane', 'urgent', 'arctic', 'emissions', 'polar-regions', 'tropical-storms']
keywords: ['wind-power', 'climate', 'antarctica', 'year-2025', 'fossil-fuels', 'hurricane', 'affecting', 'change']
description: "&nbsp; Decades of scientific research has proven that human-caused climate change is making some disasters more dangerous and more frequent"
external_url: https://grist.org/extreme-weather/how-climate-change-may-be-affecting-tornadoes/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Grist"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Extreme weather seems to make the headlines almost every week, as disasters increasingly strike out of season, break records, and hit places they never have before.&nbsp; Decades of scientific research has proven that human-caused climate change is making some disasters more dangerous and more frequent. The burning of fossil fuels like oil, gas, and coal releases carbon dioxide into the Earth’s atmosphere, where it traps heat, warms the planet, and alters the conditions in which extreme weather forms. These changes are happening more rapidly than at any time in the last 800,000 years, according to climate records.&nbsp; Below, we break down what experts know — and what they don’t — about the connections between climate change and tornadoes.&nbsp; Readers from southern and central U.S. states are likely accustomed to the sound of tornado sirens during spring and summer. But tornadoes are not exclusive to that part of the world — they have been recorded everywhere except Antarctica. All it takes is a mass of cold, dry air colliding with a warmer, moist one, which usually happens during a thunderstorm. If these air masses begin to rotate, a funnel-shaped cloud forms, bringing dangerous high-speed winds that can rip homes from their foundations.&nbsp; In the U.S., these storms most frequently form in “tornado alley,” an area in the central U.S. that includes Texas, Oklahoma, Iowa, Kansas, and the Dakotas. But they’re also common in southern states, including Alabama, Tennessee, and Kentucky, and some parts of the Midwest.&nbsp; Predicting exactly when, why, and where a tornado may hit has long mystified meteorologists and forecasters. Tornadoes form fast and move unpredictably. The temperature, humidity, and wind speeds might be exactly right, but some thunderstorms produce dozens of tornadoes while other storm patterns don’t produce any. Forecasting and warning systems have gotten much better over the years, but the lead time for a tornado warning is still about 10 minutes, compared to days for a hurricane evacuation.&nbsp; Climate scientists haven’t yet established if global warming has impacted the frequency or strength of tornadoes. But there have been some unusual events in recent years, as more tornadoes have touched down in the eastern United States. In December 2021, an outbreak of thunderstorms and tornadoes made headlines after nearly 100 people were killed across several states in the Midwest, South, and Great Plains. Typically, tornadoes don’t occur late into winter months, so these communities were caught off guard, leaving many to scramble to seek shelter. Warmer winter temperatures may contribute to tornado conditions, but more research is needed to understand the link. This story was originally published by Grist with the headline How climate change may be affecting tornadoes on Jul 7, 2025.

[Read original article](https://grist.org/extreme-weather/how-climate-change-may-be-affecting-tornadoes/)
