---
layout: feed_item
title: "AI and satellite data help researchers map world’s transition minerals rush"
date: 2025-10-09 05:00:00 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['renewable-energy', 'oceania', 'clean-energy', 'solar-power', 'year-2025', 'economic-impacts', 'wind-power', 'australia', 'urgent', 'climate-costs']
keywords: ['renewable-energy', 'clean-energy', 'oceania', 'solar-power', 'year-2025', 'satellite', 'data', 'help']
description: "Researchers are using satellite images and AI-powered modelling to map global mining activity, seeking to plug gaps in existing data as the rush for “transit..."
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/10/09/ai-and-satellite-data-help-researchers-map-worlds-transition-minerals-rush/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Researchers are using satellite images and AI-powered modelling to map global mining activity, seeking to plug gaps in existing data as the rush for “transition minerals” fuels concerns about the industry’s impact on the environment and local communities. Countries are scrambling to shore up supplies of metals vital for the transition to renewables, such as lithium used in electric vehicle (EV) batteries, and copper &#8211; used in solar panels and wind turbines, many of which are produced in environmentally sensitive areas. “New mines will likely be in areas of high biodiversity, or where water and Indigenous rights are at stake,” project lead Victor Maus from the Vienna University of Economics and Business told Climate Home News. More than half of energy transition mineral resources are located on or near the lands of Indigenous peoples and subsistence farmers, according to a 2022 study published in the Nature journal. “Monitoring those impacts is critical,” said Maus, whose team members have identified massive gaps in current data when it comes to what, how and even where minerals are being extracted around the world. Oct 3, 2025 Clean Energy Frontier Colombia proposes expert group to advance talks on minerals agreement A draft resolution aimed at advancing talks on a global minerals treaty will be discussed at a major UN environment meeting later this year Read more Oct 7, 2025 Energy Global renewables goal slips off course after Trump, China moves The IEA downgrades its forecast for renewables growth due to the US cutting renewable tax credits and China&#8217;s electricity market reforms Read more Oct 8, 2025 Comment Turkey’s new climate pledge would control emissions growth, not offer real cuts The world’s 15th-largest emitter has made progress in boosting clean energy, but it could do much more to decarbonise Read more During a previous project, they compared global satellite imagery of 120,000 square kilometres of visible mine footprints with the S&amp;P Capital IQ Pro database of mining production. The results were stark. More than half of the mining areas identified from space had no corresponding production data in the official record. To address these gaps, Maus and his team are building a mining database using satellite images. The project, which is part of the European Union-funded Mine the Gap initiative, will be a vital tool for policymakers and help foster transparency in the mining industry, he added. “We’re hoping to create not only a research tool but also a means of validating and complementing what companies report, supporting greater transparency across the sector.&#8221; Mapping environmental impact As well as counting mines and assessing overall production, the database will give a clearer picture about where the biggest environmental and social risks lie by tracking land use around mines, waste generation and signs of environmental degradation. “Simply knowing how much is being produced isn&#8217;t a direct measurement of impact,” said Tim Werner, a senior lecturer at The University of Melbourne who has worked with Maus on previous research into critical minerals. “We simply don&#8217;t have all the information we need to scientifically prove where impacts for one area are worse than others. This is a big problem for strategic environmental management at national and global scales,” he added, describing the data gaps as “mind-boggling”. A range of satellites are being used to collect the required information, including multispectral imagery, radar and hyperspectral sensors, collected from sources including the EU’s Sentinel constellation and German DLR satellites, chosen for their global coverage and accuracy. AI will then be used to scan these images, learning how to identify and track potential issues as the project develops. The challenges of collecting mining data There have been previous attempts to map the overlap between energy transition mineral mines and key biodiversity hotspots in different mineral-rich countries, as well as industry efforts to plug the gaps in data about global mining production. But past efforts to map global mining more accurately have struggled to document small-scale and artisanal mining operations, which are often unregulated despite their significant social and environmental impacts. Oct 2, 2025 Clean Energy Frontier Migrant workers building Saudi Arabia’s green future face exploitation, report finds Heat stroke, long hours and punishment for taking breaks &#8211; low-paid foreign workers compare jobs on Saudi renewable energy projects to a prison sentence Read more Sep 22, 2025 Clean Energy Frontier The company tracking energy transition minerals back to the mines Australian firm Source Certain traces minerals back to the exact point where they were extracted from the Earth &#8211; a technique that could help make cleantech supply chains more accountable Read more Sep 10, 2025 Clean Energy Frontier Digging beyond oil: Saudi Arabia bids to become a hub for energy transition minerals The top crude exporter is using its oil riches to position itself as a major player in clean energy supply chains. Investors are interested, but hurdles remain Read more In September, the International Council on Mining and Metals (ICMM) launched its global mining database &#8211; reportedly the most comprehensive mining resource to date, with information about more than 15,000 active facilities in 151 countries, but it does not include informal mining sites. “We had to draw some scope boundaries,” said Emma Gagen, the ICMM’s data and research director. “The industry is huge and that’s been the challenge this whole time &#8211; people haven’t tried to collect this data before because it’s so vast.” The case for clearer global standards Despite such data initiatives, which reflect growing pressure on the industry to clean up its act, researchers say structural and legislative changes will be needed to reduce the harms caused by mining. Gagen said more uniform regulatory standards would “drive performance improvements across the industry.” “What’s most needed is alignment,” Maus said. “Clearer global standards on what should be measured and reported, and policies that encourage disclosure of mining data.” For Maus and his team, having an accurate picture is a crucial first step. “If we don&#8217;t even know how many materials are being produced, we&#8217;ve got very little basis to even understand the scale of possible impacts in an area,” Werner said. Main image: Satellite image showing the expansion of nickel mining in Sulawesi, Indonesia (Photo: Sentinel-2 cloudless by EOX IT Services GmbH, which contains modified Copernicus Sentinel data 2024) The post AI and satellite data help researchers map world’s transition minerals rush appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/10/09/ai-and-satellite-data-help-researchers-map-worlds-transition-minerals-rush/)
