---
layout: feed_item
title: "The EV battery tech that’s worth the hype, according to experts"
date: 2025-11-09 14:00:00 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['public-health', 'year-2027', 'climate-health', 'urgent']
keywords: ['tech', 'urgent', 'battery', 'worth', 'public-health', 'year-2027', 'climate-health']
description: "You’ve seen the&nbsp;headlines:&nbsp;This&nbsp;battery&nbsp;breakthrough is going to change the&nbsp;electric vehicle&nbsp;forever"
external_url: https://grist.org/transportation/the-ev-battery-tech-thats-worth-the-hype-according-to-experts/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Grist"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

You’ve seen the&nbsp;headlines:&nbsp;This&nbsp;battery&nbsp;breakthrough is going to change the&nbsp;electric vehicle&nbsp;forever. And then … silence. You head to the local showroom, and the cars all kind of look and feel the same. WIRED got annoyed about this phenomenon. So we talked to battery technology experts about what’s really going on in electric vehicle batteries. Which technologies are here? Which will be, probably, but aren’t yet, so don’t hold your breath? What’s probably not coming anytime soon? “It’s easy to get excited about these things, because batteries are so complex,” said Pranav Jaswani, a technology analyst at IDTechEx, a market intelligence firm. “Many little things are going to have such a big effect.” That’s why so many companies, including automakers, their suppliers, and battery-makers, are experimenting with so many bit parts of the battery. Swap one electrical conductor material for another, and an electric vehicle battery’s range might increase by 50 miles. Rejigger how battery packs are put together, and an automaker might bring down manufacturing costs enough to give consumers a break on the sales lot. Still, experts say, it can take a long time to get even small tweaks into production cars — sometimes 10 years or more. “Obviously, we want to make sure that whatever we put in an EV works well and it passes safety standards,” said Evelina Stoikou, who leads the battery technology and supply chain team at BloombergNEF, a research firm. Ensuring that means scientists coming up with new ideas and suppliers figuring out how to execute them; the automakers, in turn, rigorously test each iteration. All the while, everyone’s asking the most important question: Does this improvement make financial sense? So it’s only logical that not every breakthrough in the lab makes it to the road. Here are the ones that really count — and the ones that haven’t quite panned out, at least so far. It’s really happening The big-deal battery breakthroughs all have something in common: They’re related to the lithium-ion battery. Other battery chemistries are out there — more on them later — but in the next decade, it’s going to be hard to catch up with the dominant battery form. “Lithium-ion is already very mature,” said Stoikou. Lots of players have invested big money in the technology, so “any new one is going to have to compete with the status quo.” Lithium iron phosphate Why it’s exciting: LFP batteries use iron and phosphate instead of pricier and harder-to-source nickel and cobalt, which are found in conventional lithium-ion batteries. They’re also more stable and slower to degrade after multiple charges. The upshot: LFP batteries can help bring down the cost of manufacturing an EV, an especially important data point while Western electrics struggle to compete, cost-wise, with conventional gas-powered cars. LFP batteries are already common in China, and&nbsp;they’re set to become more popular&nbsp;in European and American electric vehicles in the coming years. Why it’s hard: LFP is less energy dense than alternatives, meaning you can’t pack as much charge — or range — into each battery. More nickel Why it’s exciting:&nbsp;The increased nickel content in lithium nickel manganese cobalt batteries ups the energy density, meaning more range in a battery pack without much more size or weight. Also, more nickel can mean less cobalt, a metal that’s&nbsp;both expensive and ethically dubious to obtain. Why it’s hard: Batteries with higher nickel content are potentially less stable, which means they carry a higher risk of cracking or &#8220;thermal runaway,&#8221; which can cause fires. This means battery-makers experimenting with different nickel content have to spend more time and energy on the careful design of their products. That extra fussiness means more expense. For this reason, expect to see more nickel use in batteries for higher-end EVs. Dry electrode process Why it’s exciting: Usually, battery electrodes are made by mixing materials into a solvent slurry, which then is applied to a metal current collector foil, dried, and pressed. The dry electrode process cuts down on the solvents by mixing the materials in dry powder form before application and lamination. Less solvent means fewer environmental and health and safety concerns. And getting rid of the drying process can save production time — and up efficiency — while reducing the physical footprint needed to manufacture batteries. This all can lead to cheaper manufacturing, “which should trickle down to make a cheaper car,” said Jaswani. Tesla has already incorporated a dry anode process into its battery-making. (The anode is the negative electrode that stores lithium ions while a battery is charging.) LG and Samsung SGI are also working on pilot production lines. Why it’s hard: Using dry powders can be more technically complicated. Cell-to-pack Why it’s exciting: In your standard electric vehicle battery, individual battery cells get grouped into modules, which are then assembled into packs. Not so in cell-to-pack, which puts cells directly into a pack structure without the middle module step. This lets battery-makers fit more battery into the same space, and can lead to some 50 additional miles of range and higher top speeds, said Jaswani. It also brings down manufacturing costs, savings that can be passed down to the car buyer. Big-time automakers including Tesla and BYD, plus Chinese battery giant CATL, are already using the tech. Why it’s hard: Without modules, it can be harder to control thermal runaway and maintain the battery pack’s structure. Plus, cell-to-pack makes replacing a faulty battery cell much harder, which means smaller flaws can require opening or even replacing the entire pack. Silicon anodes Why it’s exciting: Lithium-ion batteries have graphite anodes. Adding silicon to the mix, though, could have huge upsides: more energy storage (meaning longer driving ranges) and faster charging, potentially down to a blazing six to 10 minutes to top up. Tesla already mixes a bit of silicon into its graphite anodes, and other automakers — Mercedes-Benz, General Motors — say they’re getting close to mass production. Why it’s hard: Silicon alloyed with lithium expands and contracts as it goes through the charging and discharging cycle, which can cause mechanical stress and even fracturing. Over time, this can lead to more dramatic battery capacity losses. For now, you’re more likely to find silicon anodes in smaller batteries, like those in phones or even motorcycles. It’s kind of happening The battery tech in the more speculative bucket has undergone plenty of testing. But it’s still not quite at a place where most manufacturers are building production lines and putting it into cars. Sodium-Ion Batteries Why it’s exciting: Sodium — it’s everywhere! Compared to lithium, the element is cheaper and easier to find and process, which means tracking down the materials to build sodium-ion batteries could give automakers a supply chain break. The batteries also seem to perform better in extreme temperatures, and are more stable. Chinese battery-maker CATL says it will start mass production of the batteries next year and that the batteries could eventually cover 40 percent of the Chinese passenger-vehicle market. Why it’s hard:&nbsp;Sodium ions are heavier than their lithium counterparts, so they generally store less energy per battery pack. That could make them a better fit for battery storage than for vehicles. It’s also early days for this tech, which means fewer suppliers and fewer time-tested manufacturing processes. Solid state batteries Why it’s exciting: Automakers have been promising for years that groundbreaking solid state batteries are right around the corner. That would be great, if true. This tech subs the liquid or gel electrolytes in a conventional lithium-ion battery for a solid electrolyte. These electrolytes should come in different chemistries, but they all have some big advantages: more energy density, faster charging, more durability, fewer safety risks (no liquid electrolyte means no leaks). Toyota says it will finally launch its first vehicles with solid state batteries in 2027 or 2028. BloombergNEF projects that by 2035, solid state batteries will account for 10 percent of EV and storage production. Why it’s hard: Some solid electrolytes have a hard time at low temperatures. The biggest issues, however, have to do with manufacturing. Putting together these new batteries requires new equipment. It’s really hard to build defect-free layers of electrolyte. And the industry hasn’t come to an agreement about which solid electrolyte to use, which makes it hard to create supply chains. Maybe it’ll happen Good ideas don&#8217;t always make a ton of sense in the real world. Wireless charging Why it’s exciting: Park your car, get out, and have it charge up while you wait — no plugs required. Wireless charging could be the peak of convenience, and some automakers insist it’s coming. Porsche, for example, is showing off a prototype, with plans to roll out the real thing next year. Why it’s hard: The issue, said Jaswani, is that the tech underlying the chargers we have right now works perfectly well and is much cheaper to install. He expects that eventually, wireless charging will show up in some restricted use cases — maybe in buses, for example, that could charge up throughout their routes if they stop on top of a charging pad. But this tech may never go truly mainstream, he said. This story was originally published by Grist with the headline The EV battery tech that’s worth the hype, according to experts on Nov 9, 2025.

[Read original article](https://grist.org/transportation/the-ev-battery-tech-thats-worth-the-hype-according-to-experts/)
