---
layout: feed_item
title: "In new book, WRI chief argues for climate optimism despite obstacles"
date: 2025-09-11 14:57:03 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['climate-targets', 'wildfires', 'climate-policy', 'renewable-energy', 'flooding', 'urgent', 'clean-energy', 'paris-agreement', 'extreme-weather', 'fossil-fuels']
keywords: ['climate-targets', 'wildfires', 'book', 'renewable-energy', 'flooding', 'argues', 'climate-policy', 'chief']
description: "But a new book by the head of the World Resources Institute (WRI) argues passionately for a more positive view"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/09/11/wri-president-ani-dasgupta-climate-optimism-politics/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Given the constant flow of bad news around climate change – smashed heat records, shrinking polar ice, rampant wildfires, apocalyptic floods – you’d be forgiven for thinking there’s no cause for hope. But a new book by the head of the World Resources Institute (WRI) argues passionately for a more positive view. In “The New Global Possible &#8211; Rebuilding Optimism in the Age of Climate Crisis”, Ani Dasgupta talks us through key developments over the past four decades that have driven forward international climate action, including an intriguing account of how the Paris Agreement was landed against the odds. Dasgupta, president and CEO of the US-based WRI, is far from evangelical about the global mission of green transition. His assessment of the state of play is rooted in realism – and, like many advocates for a sustainable world, he is disappointed with the pace of change so far. But, he insists, that is no reason to give up. The book explains elegantly &#8211; drawing on some 60 real-world stories of success and more than 100 interviews with experts, leaders and change-makers &#8211; not just what’s holding things back but, most importantly, how to overcome those obstacles. In an interview with Climate Home News before the book’s publication this week, the softly-spoken former head of infrastructure at the World Bank pointed to leaps forward in technology – from solar and wind power to greener cement and satellites that can monitor rainforest loss remotely – as the underlying enabler of climate progress. But he emphasised that technology alone will not be enough. “We need to use technology as a starting point to orchestrate the change,” he explained. “We need to get the outcome we want that is not only good for climate, but good for people and nature at the same time.&#8221; Sep 10, 2025 Clean Energy Frontier Digging beyond oil: Saudi Arabia bids to become a hub for energy transition minerals The top crude exporter is using its oil riches to position itself as a major player in clean energy supply chains. Investors are interested, but hurdles remain Read more Sep 10, 2025 Politics Ethiopia&#8217;s preparedness puts it ahead of Nigeria in bid to host COP32, campaigners say Ethiopia&#8217;s logistics, infrastructure and climate diplomacy make it seem better placed to host the 2027 UN climate talks than its West African rival &#8211; for now Read more Sep 9, 2025 Energy China on course to peak fossil fuel power as soon as this year, reports say The Asian nation&#8217;s energy transition is entering a new phase, with soaring renewables reducing demand for fossil fuels, analysis shows Read more Focus on people &#8211; not carbon A major failure of the climate movement so far, in Dasgupta’s view, is that it has focused too heavily on carbon &#8211; the damage it’s doing and how to reduce CO2 emissions &#8211; and not enough on people. Unless voters understand that measures to tackle climate change will bring them benefits now rather than in a far distant future, they are unlikely to make green choices a priority, he argues – especially when those decisions come with an upfront cost such as replacing a gas boiler with a heat pump. That’s why some governments, including in Europe, have run into trouble when trying to force low-carbon behaviour shifts. Dasgupta believes politicians have done a pretty bad job at telling citizens why it makes personal sense for them to switch to greener ways of living, working and doing business. He noted that in 2024 – a historic year for elections, with about 70 countries holding polls – only one, the UK, saw strong campaigning on climate policies, with the centre-left Labour Party winning partly on a green ticket. India-born Dasgupta, a trained architect who has many years’ experience of working on ways to make cities more sustainable, argues that climate policy experts need to offer politicians more help to demonstrate why it’s in the public interest to get behind climate action. “I think for too long, the transition has been painted as about the sacrifices we need to do; don’t drive cars, take buses and [buy] heat pumps &#8211; but not the outcome that is there. That is clean air for our kids, abundant, affordable energy, food that doesn&#8217;t destroy nature, clean water,” he said. Ani Dasgupta, president and CEO of the World Resources Institute and author of &#8220;The New Global Possible &#8211; Rebuilding Optimism in the Age of Climate Crisis&#8221; (Photo: Beverlié Lord) Ani Dasgupta, president and CEO of the World Resources Institute and author of &#8220;The New Global Possible &#8211; Rebuilding Optimism in the Age of Climate Crisis&#8221; (Photo: Beverlié Lord) Hydrocarbons “everywhere” Yet the question still begs itself: why – if the advantages seem obvious – has it been so hard to make these changes at the scale and pace required? The answer, according to Dasgupta, is that their proponents are running up against a model rooted in 200 years of prosperity fuelled by coal, oil and gas. As a result, hydrocarbons “are everywhere in the economy”, even in many daily essentials like shampoo &#8211; and the incumbents who got rich from extracting and selling fossil fuels are fighting to preserve the status quo. “We have to find a path for them to change. They&#8217;re not just going to go away. They&#8217;re very economically powerful, politically connected,” Dasgupta said. Businesses doubt COP30 logistics as presidency calls on them to come to Belém Renewed business and political support for the prevailing high-carbon economic model has led to a pushback against climate action in some parts of the West, not least in the United States where the administration of climate change-sceptic Donald Trump wants to “drill, baby drill” and is pulling the country out of the 2015 Paris climate agreement. Dasgupta doesn’t find this too surprising. “I think this backlash was inevitable because when we signed the Paris Agreement, we thought we were signing a climate agreement. We didn&#8217;t realise we were signing onto a vast economic transition that we&#8217;re in the beginning of,” he said. COP: &#8220;Imperfect but necessary&#8221; The book does an efficient job at defending the UN climate process that yielded the Paris pact and its emblematic annual COP summits, which have come under attack in recent years for falling short of promises, getting bogged down in arcane arguments and turning into a travelling climate circus. Dasgupta points to how &#8211; patchy as its implementation may be &#8211; action spurred by the Paris Agreement has brought down global warming predictions from around 4 degrees Celsius this century to 2.6C &#8211; and if all pledges made so far were to become a reality, even to 1.7C, within the promised range. At the same time, he argues for making COPs more effective by changing decision-making from the current consensus-based model to one that that &#8220;gives every country a voice but not a veto&#8221;. Cop21 president Laurent Fabius holds up the text of the Paris Agreement. (Photo: IISD/ENB/ Kiara Worth) Cop21 president Laurent Fabius holds up the text of the Paris Agreement. (Photo: IISD/ENB/ Kiara Worth) In addition, to give the Paris process more teeth, he recommends greater transparency on individual countries&#8217; progress, which would help civil society and citizens hold governments to account, along with the ability for the five-year stocktake to offer &#8220;remedies and rigorous regimes for improvement&#8221;. In the end, making the Paris Agreement &#8211; and the national climate plans (NDCs) that underpin it &#8211; work as intended will require &#8220;a systemwide economic transition&#8221; that can only be achieved by uniting all government ministries, businesses and financial institutions behind that mission, the book notes. &#8220;COP is an imperfect but necessary instrument for mobilising global climate action, but the harsh reality is that our success currently depends on voluntary contributions to be implemented beyond it,&#8221; Dasgupta writes. Win-win-win? Making this happen means convincing the world outside of COPs it&#8217;s an endeavour worth signing up for. The sixth chapter of the book is dedicated to how a loose consortium of researchers, top-level officials and organisation such as WRI and the World Economic Forum embarked on a monumental mission to do that by shaping a positive narrative around the economics of a low-carbon transition. One piece of number-crunching in particular captured imaginations in the climate community and beyond: if done right, investing in climate action could result in $26 trillion of economic benefits by 2030 compared with business as usual, the New Climate Economy (NCE) research programme calculated. Has hard data like this worked to win hearts and minds? It depends on who you ask. According to the book, in a statement released ahead of COP27 in 2022, NCE commissioners Sharan Burrow, Nicolas Stern and Paul Polman described this figure and the work supporting it as “a breakthrough”, showing “once and for all that ambitious climate action is a win-win-win for the climate, people, and the economy”. COP30 president: Transition from fossil fuels can start without climate talks Sadly, that victory may not have been as decisive as they had hoped, as evidenced in today’s culture wars over the costs of net zero in the UK, the conspicuous absence of climate and nature from election campaigns, and the dash by many fossil-fuel and financial behemoths to row back on their emissions-cutting pledges. Despite recent setbacks, Dasgupta puts his hope in two ways forward: a push to translate global climate goals into national-level transitions in sectors like energy and food; and a combination of government regulation and voluntary business action to keep the private sector moving in the right direction. &nbsp;&nbsp; &#8220;I don&#8217;t think we have the luxury to be disappointed,&#8221; he said. &#8220;I think we know what [has] to be done, what needs to happen. We just have to get to work.&#8221; The New Global Possible: Rebuilding Optimism in the Age of Climate Crisis (9781633310667) is published by Disruption Books. The post In new book, WRI chief argues for climate optimism despite obstacles appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/09/11/wri-president-ani-dasgupta-climate-optimism-politics/)
