---
layout: feed_item
title: "Self-taught mechanics give second life to Jordan’s  glut of spent EV batteries"
date: 2025-11-03 06:00:00 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['climate-costs', 'climate-health', 'urgent', 'renewable-energy', 'year-2024', 'clean-energy', 'public-health', 'economic-impacts', 'solar-power']
keywords: ['climate-costs', 'urgent', 'climate-health', 'mechanics', 'renewable-energy', 'year-2024', 'self', 'taught']
description: "“I installed this on my own, although I haven’t formally trained as an engineer"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/11/03/self-taught-mechanics-give-second-life-to-jordans-glut-of-spent-ev-batteries/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

In the basement of a middle-class home in Jordan’s capital, a homemade energy storage system connects 20 reconditioned Tesla car battery modules to rooftop solar panels, meeting nearly all of the family’s electricity needs and keeping their lights on during power cuts. “I installed this on my own, although I haven’t formally trained as an engineer. It’s really a hobby,” said the owner of the house, a middle-aged communications professional who asked not to be named. “It’s cut my electricity bill to a small fraction of what it was,” he said, gesturing towards the stack of modules and inverters. He bought the batteries from an auto repair shop in Amman that specialises in repairing and reconditioning Tesla batteries – a growing trade in Jordan, where electric vehicles (EVs) now account for more than half of total vehicle imports, according to data from the US International Trade Association. Jordan’s transport sector accounts for more than a quarter of the country’s greenhouse gas emissions, making it a focus of the government’s climate strategy, which seeks to cut emissions 31% by 2030. But as climate-friendly tax breaks boost sales and help Jordan emerge as an EV leader in the Middle East, the country now faces a looming wave of end-of-life batteries and a lack of formal infrastructure to deal with them. That is where people like auto repair shop owner Shadi Jameel are stepping in with an entrepreneurial solution. Reconditioned Tesla car battery modules are used as an energy storage system in a home in Amman, Jordan (Photo: Yamuna Matheswaran) New life for end-of-life batteries Besides undertaking battery repair and maintenance in cars, Jameel’s workshop, located in Amman’s Al Bayader industrial area, also sells refurbished batteries to customers for usage in second-life applications such as mobile and stationary energy storage systems, like that installed by the homeowner in his basement. “We work exclusively with Tesla batteries,” Jameel said, smoking a cigarette as he surveyed the bustling workshop. “We extend battery life and fix issues such as disconnection between modules and cells,” he said. With about 150,000 EVs on Jordan’s roads this year, and sales forecast to keep growing in the years ahead, Jameel has plenty of supplies. By 2035, Jordan will have nearly 200,000 depleted high-voltage lithium batteries from EVs alone, according to the Circularity Hub (C-Hub) for Spent EV Batteries. C-Hub was established in 2024 by the German Jordanian University with governmental support to study the issue and shape policies that will enable sustainable management of spent EV batteries and lead to economic growth. In the meantime, however, there are no formal channels for depleted EV batteries to be recycled or reconditioned in the country of roughly 11 million people – leading to the involvement of a growing informal sector. In the absence of formal training programmes in the country, many mechanics have taught themselves how to repair and recondition batteries. “I learned from online videos and by talking to people in other countries that I work with,” Jameel said. Tesla cars parked in front of Shadi Jameel&#8217;s auto repair shop in Amman, Jordan (Photo: Shadi Jameel) Safety worries EV batteries that are classed as end-of-life may still retain up to 80% of their original capacity, according to the International Energy Agency, which means they can still be used in second-life applications, such as household energy storage. “I’ve seen and heard of spent batteries being hooked up to solar systems or other local power setups, often at family farms or vacation homes in semi-remote areas,” said Fadwa Dababneh, C-Hub’s director. As well as saving money on bills and reducing battery waste, using spent batteries for energy storage stabilises the electricity grid as Jordan aims to get half of its power from renewables by 2030, up from 29% today. May 28, 2024 Clean Energy Frontier The Canadian city betting on recycling rare earths for the energy transition As countries scramble to secure critical minerals, Kingston’s burgeoning clean tech ecosystem is attracting startups to create circular supply chains and reduce reliance on China Read more Jan 21, 2025 Clean Energy Frontier Indian start-ups mine e-waste for battery minerals but growing industry has a dark side Recycling e-waste can unlock a vast and sustainable supply of transition minerals but in India the sector relies on a neglected informal economy Read more Sep 10, 2025 Clean Energy Frontier Digging beyond oil: Saudi Arabia bids to become a hub for energy transition minerals The top crude exporter is using its oil riches to position itself as a major player in clean energy supply chains. Investors are interested, but hurdles remain Read more But the current informal nature of most battery reconditioning raises safety concerns, Dababneh said. “These setups are typically done by freelancers or hobbyists rather than specialists or businesses formally working in this space,” Dababneh said. “Because they’re informal, there’s limited visibility on how widespread or safe these practices are.” Two battery-related explosions this year, one in a repair shop and the other during the transportation of a used battery, have spotlighted these risks. While no one was hurt, the explosions have spurred the Environment Ministry to focus on the looming spent-battery crisis. Prolonging battery life At the moment, depleted batteries are exported for recycling – mainly to China and Germany, said Mahmoud Zboon, head of the ministry’s Hazardous Waste Department. Otherwise, they can be sent to the sole hazardous waste landfill in the country, where they are held indefinitely. In practice, many end up in regular landfills, posing environmental and health risks, including the leakage of toxic heavy metals into the soil and groundwater. Ali Al-Zyoud, chief technology officer at ExelX, a company specialising in battery-regenerative technology, wants to change that. “There is a lot of potential here in Jordan when it comes to lithium-ion batteries,” he said. Headquartered in the UAE, ExelX’s centre in Amman works with Japan-based Battery Bank Systems and uses its technology for the diagnosis, charging, and maintenance of different types of batteries. The technology prevents battery deterioration, restores cell balance and prolongs battery life. Workers at the ExelX centre, a company specialising in battery regenerative technology, in Amman, Jordan (Photo: Yamuna Matheswaran) Private sector challenges According to Al-Zyoud, ExelX has extended the lifecycle of more than 500 Tesla batteries over the past three years. “Battery replacement is expensive. A regenerated battery only costs 20% of the price of a new one. So this also offers financial benefits to EV owners,” he said, adding that Jordan urgently needs training programmes and collection centres to ensure safe battery storage and prevent dangerous disposal. Zboon, the government official, said the private sector has been attempting to invest in the establishment of collection centres. But hefty initial investment needs and lack of standardisation in battery technology were challenges. A strategic brief recently released by C-Hub proposed a robust battery-tracking and traceability system, saying that would enable formal private sector investment to capture value from the battery lifecycle. Informal workshops should also be regulated and financial incentives would encourage that, Dababneh said. “Bringing informal repair shops into the formal system would be very beneficial, particularly in terms of ensuring safety and quality,” she said. The post Self-taught mechanics give second life to Jordan’s glut of spent EV batteries appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/11/03/self-taught-mechanics-give-second-life-to-jordans-glut-of-spent-ev-batteries/)
