---
layout: feed_item
title: "COP30 Bulletin Day 2: India’s targets missing but Korea and Mexico make pledges"
date: 2025-11-11 14:39:53 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['net-zero', 'climate-targets']
keywords: ['net-zero', 'climate-targets', 'india', 'bulletin', 'targets']
description: "Two days into COP30, the world’s most populous country and third-biggest emitter &#8211; India &#8211; has yet to announce its 2035 NDC emissions target"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/11/11/cop30-bulletin-day-2-indias-targets-missing-but-korea-and-mexico-make-pledges/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Two days into COP30, the world’s most populous country and third-biggest emitter &#8211; India &#8211; has yet to announce its 2035 NDC emissions target. Of the G20 major economies, only India and Saudi Arabia have still not done so. The delay has confounded the pre-summit expectations of the UN and Indian media. Citing government sources, the Indian Express and The Hindu separately reported back in September that it would be announced “during, or just ahead of” COP30. The government of India &#8211; which was enraged by the ending of the last COP where it fiercely rejected the new climate finance goal &#8211; has so far had a low-profile at this one. With local elections going on in Bihar, the country’s speech at the leaders&#8217; summit was delivered not by the prime minister or even a minister but by the country’s ambassador to Brazil. He announced nothing new of substance &#8211; other than joining the Tropical Forest Forever Facility as an observer &#8211; but criticised developed countries for depleting the carbon budget while developing countries lead the way in taking “decisive climate action”. …but Mexico and Korea land new goals In contrast, Mexico’s environment minister announced in Belém that the country will aim to cut emissions by up to 50% by 2035 compared to a business-as-usual scenario. For the first time, the oil-producing nation has set a limit on absolute emissions of 365 million-404 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent by 2035. It also targets &#8211; conditional on international support &#8211; a lower level of 332-363 million tonnes by the same year. According to a recent UN report, the country’s current policies will keep emissions rising and Mexico’s 2030 target allows them to do so until at least 2030 before they start coming down to reach net zero by 2050. In South Korea, the government on Tuesday announced a target to reduce emissions 53-61% from 2018 levels by 2035. The country’s emissions peaked around 2018 and have started heading slowly downward. It had earlier promised a 40% cut by 2030 and to reach net zero by 2050. The new 2035 target is more ambitious than two scenarios proposed just a few days ago by the environment ministry. However, sectoral targets for industry are less ambitious than the total, which is seen as a response to pressure from energy-intensive industries. Climate minister Kim Sung-whan told a press briefing that higher ambition for manufacturing was not possible “as too few investments have been made in the past to suddenly decarbonise manufacturing industries by a significant amount”. Gahee Han, from Korean NGO Solutions For Our Climate, said the government would aim for the lower end of the range &#8211; 53% &#8211; which “falls far short of what is needed”. She called for the government to target at least the upper level of 61%. The post COP30 Bulletin Day 2: India&#8217;s targets missing but Korea and Mexico make pledges appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/11/11/cop30-bulletin-day-2-indias-targets-missing-but-korea-and-mexico-make-pledges/)
