---
layout: feed_item
title: "DeBriefed 15 August 2025: Raging wildfires; Xi’s priorities; Factchecking the Trump climate report"
date: 2025-08-15 12:51:27 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['year-2025', 'urgent', 'renewable-energy', 'economic-impacts', 'usa', 'oceania', 'heatwave', 'wildfires', 'arctic', 'extreme-weather']
keywords: ['year-2025', 'urgent', 'usa', 'debriefed', 'august', 'raging', 'renewable-energy', 'economic-impacts']
description: "An essential guide to the week&#8217;s key developments relating to climate change"
external_url: https://www.carbonbrief.org/debriefed-15-august-2025-raging-wildfires-xis-priorities-factchecking-the-trump-climate-report/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Carbon Brief"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Welcome to Carbon Brief’s DeBriefed. An essential guide to the week&#8217;s key developments relating to climate change. This week Blazing heat hits Europe FANNING THE FLAMES: Wildfires “fanned by a heatwave and strong winds” caused havoc across southern Europe, Reuters reported. It added: “Fire has affected nearly 440,000 hectares (1,700 square miles) in the eurozone so far in 2025, double the average for the same period of the year since 2006.” Extreme heat is “breaking temperature records across Europe”, the Guardian said, with several countries reporting readings of around 40C. HUMAN TOLL: At least three people have died in the wildfires erupting across Spain, Turkey and Albania, France24 said, adding that the fires have “displaced thousands in Greece and Albania”. Le Monde reported that a child in Italy “died of heatstroke”, while thousands were evacuated from Spain and firefighters “battled three large wildfires” in Portugal. UK WILDFIRE RISK: The UK saw temperatures as high as 33.4C this week as England “entered its fourth heatwave”, BBC News said. The high heat is causing “nationally significant” water shortfalls, it added, “hitting farms, damaging wildlife and increasing wildfires”. The Daily Mirror noted that these conditions “could last until mid-autumn”. Scientists warn the UK faces possible “firewaves” due to climate change, BBC News also reported. Around the world GRID PRESSURES: Iraq suffered a “near nationwide blackout” as elevated power demand – due to extreme temperatures of around 50C – triggered a transmission line failure, Bloomberg reported. ‘DIRE’ DOWN UNDER: The Australian government is keeping a climate risk assessment that contains “dire” implications for the continent “under wraps”, the Australian Financial Review said. EXTREME RAINFALL: Mexico City is “seeing one of its heaviest rainy seasons in years”, the Washington Post said. Downpours in the Japanese island of Kyushu “caused flooding and mudslides”, according to Politico. In Kashmir, flash floods killed 56 and left “scores missing”, the Associated Press said. SOUTH-SOUTH COOPERATION: China and Brazil agreed to “ensure the success” of COP30 in a recent phone call, Chinese state news agency Xinhua reported. PLASTIC ‘DEADLOCK’: Talks on a plastic pollution treaty have failed again at a summit in Geneva, according to the Guardian, with countries “deadlocked” on whether it should include “curbs on production and toxic chemicals”. 15 The number of times by which the most ethnically-diverse areas in England are more likely to experience extreme heat than its “least diverse” areas, according to new analysis by Carbon Brief. Latest climate research As many as 13 minerals critical for low-carbon energy may face shortages under 2C pathways | Nature Climate Change A “scoping review” examined the impact of climate change on poor sexual and reproductive health and rights in sub-Saharan Africa | PLOS One A UK university cut the carbon footprint of its weekly canteen menu by 31% “without students noticing” | Nature Food (For more, see Carbon Brief’s in-depth daily summaries of the top climate news stories on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday.) Captured Factchecking Trump’s climate report A report commissioned by the US government to justify rolling back climate regulations contains “at least 100 false or misleading statements”, according to a Carbon Brief factcheck involving dozens of leading climate scientists. The report, compiled in two months by five hand-picked researchers, inaccurately claims that “CO2-induced warming might be less damaging economically than commonly believed” and misleadingly states that “excessively aggressive [emissions] mitigation policies could prove more detrimental than beneficial”80 Spotlight Does Xi Jinping care about climate change? This week, Carbon Brief unpacks new research on Chinese president Xi Jinping’s policy priorities. On this day in 2005, Xi Jinping, a local official in eastern China, made an unplanned speech when touring a small village – a rare occurrence in China’s highly-choreographed political culture. In it, he observed that “lucid waters and lush mountains are mountains of silver and gold” – that is, the environment cannot be sacrificed for the sake of growth. (The full text of the speech is not available, although Xi discussed the concept in a brief newspaper column&nbsp;– see below&nbsp;– a few days later.)&nbsp; In a time where most government officials were laser-focused on delivering economic growth, this message was highly unusual. Forward-thinking on environment As a local official in the early 2000s, Xi endorsed the concept of “green GDP”, which integrates the value of natural resources and the environment into GDP calculations.&nbsp; He also penned a regular newspaper column, 22 of which discussed environmental protection – although “climate change” was never mentioned. This focus carried over to China’s national agenda when Xi became president.&nbsp; New research from the Asia Society Policy Institute tracked policies in which Xi is reported by state media to have “personally” taken action. It found that environmental protection is one of six topics in which he is often said to have directly steered policymaking. Such policies include guidelines to build a “Beautiful China”, the creation of an environmental protection inspection team and the “three-north shelterbelt” afforestation programme.&nbsp; “It&#8217;s important to know what Xi’s priorities are because the top leader wields outsized influence in the Chinese political system,” Neil Thomas, Asia Society Policy Institute fellow and report co-author, told Carbon Brief. Local policymakers are “more likely” to invest resources in addressing policies they know have Xi’s attention, to increase their chances for promotion, he added. What about climate and energy? However, the research noted, climate and energy policies have not been publicised as bearing Xi’s personal touch.&nbsp; “I think Xi prioritises environmental protection more than climate change because reducing pollution is an issue of social stability,” Thomas said, noting that “smoggy skies and polluted rivers” were more visible and more likely to trigger civil society pushback than gradual temperature increases. The paper also said topics might not be linked to Xi personally when they are “too technical” or “politically sensitive”.&nbsp; For example, Xi’s landmark decision for China to achieve carbon neutrality by 2060 is widely reported as having only been made after climate modelling – facilitated by former climate envoy Xie Zhenhua&nbsp;–&nbsp;showed that this goal was achievable. Prior to this, Xi had never spoken publicly about carbon neutrality.&nbsp; Prof Alex Wang, a University of California, Los Angeles professor of law not involved in the research, noted that emphasising Xi’s personal attention may signal “top” political priorities, but not necessarily Xi’s “personal interests”. By not emphasising climate, he said, Xi may be trying to avoid “pushing the system to overprioritise climate to the exclusion of the other priorities”. There are other ways to know where climate ranks on the policy agenda, Thomas noted: “Climate watchers should look at what Xi says, what Xi does and what policies Xi authorises in the name of the ‘central committee’. Is Xi talking more about climate? Is Xi establishing institutions and convening meetings that focus on climate? Is climate becoming a more prominent theme in top-level documents?” Watch, read, listen TRUMP EFFECT: The Columbia Energy Exchange podcast examined how pressure from US tariffs could affect India’s clean energy transition.&nbsp; NAMIBIAN ‘DESTRUCTION’: The National Observer investigated the failure to address “human rights abuses and environmental destruction” claims against a Canadian oil company in Namibia. ‘RED AI’: The Network for the Digital Economy and the Environment studied the state of current research on “Red AI”, or the “negative environmental implications of AI”. Coming up 17 August: Bolivian general elections 18-29 August: Preparatory talks on the entry into force of the “High Seas Treaty”, New York 18-22 August: Y20 Summit, Johannesburg 21 August: Advancing the “Africa clean air programme” through Africa-Asia collaboration, Yokohama Pick of the jobs Lancaster Environment Centre, senior research associate: JUST Centre | Salary: £39,355-£45,413. Location: Lancaster, UK Environmental Justice Foundation, communications and media officer, Francophone Africa | Salary: XOF600,000-XOF800,000. Location: Dakar, Senegal Politico, energy &amp; climate editor | Salary: Unknown. Location: Brussels, Belgium EnviroCatalysts, meteorologist | Salary: Unknown. Location: New Delhi, India DeBriefed is edited by Daisy Dunne. Please send any tips or feedback to debriefed@carbonbrief.org. This is an online version of Carbon Brief’s weekly DeBriefed email newsletter. Subscribe for&nbsp;free here. DeBriefed 8 August 2025: Arctic heatwave; Climate anxiety deep-dive; France’s wildfire crisis DeBriefed | 08.08.25 DeBriefed 1 August 2025: Trump targets ‘endangerment finding’; Floods and heatwaves; ‘Thirst’ exhibition DeBriefed | 01.08.25 DeBriefed 25 July 2025: World court delivers climate ‘turning point’; Renewables ‘unstoppable’; Antarctica’s oldest ice examined DeBriefed | 25.07.25 DeBriefed 18 July 2025: India’s clean-energy milestone; Climate reaches UK parliament; Conserving trees and culture in Kenya DeBriefed | 18.07.25 The post DeBriefed 15 August 2025: Raging wildfires; Xi’s priorities; Factchecking the Trump climate report appeared first on Carbon Brief.

[Read original article](https://www.carbonbrief.org/debriefed-15-august-2025-raging-wildfires-xis-priorities-factchecking-the-trump-climate-report/)
