---
layout: feed_item
title: "Vanuatu pursues new UN resolution to turn ICJ climate opinion into action"
date: 2025-09-23 00:40:55 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['paris-agreement', 'oceania', 'climate-health', 'pacific-region', 'emissions', 'public-health', 'year-2023', 'climate-policy', 'fossil-fuels']
keywords: ['paris-agreement', 'resolution', 'oceania', 'climate-health', 'pacific-region', 'emissions', 'pursues', 'vanuatu']
description: "The Pacific island nation of Vanuatu said on Monday that it is drafting a UN resolution to turn a landmark judicial opinion on states&#8217; legal responsibi..."
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/09/23/vanuatu-new-un-resolution-icj-climate-opinion-action-legal-justice/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

The Pacific island nation of Vanuatu said on Monday that it is drafting a UN resolution to turn a landmark judicial opinion on states&#8217; legal responsibilities to tackle climate change from words into “political action”. Ralph Regenvanu, Vanuatu’s minister of climate change, said the resolution would be tabled later this year, likely after November’s COP30 climate summit, once governments’ responses to the International Court of Justice (ICJ) ruling have become clearer. He told journalists that Vanuatu was putting together a group of supportive countries &#8211; which he hoped would cover every region &#8211; to push the UN resolution forward, and he expected it would quickly gain backing from a majority of states. The resolution “will be about ensuring the court&#8217;s findings are not left on paper, but become living obligations”, he said on the sidelines of Climate Week NYC in New York this Monday. In the ICJ opinion, handed down in July, the court&#8217;s 15 judges decided unanimously that governments have a legal duty to protect the climate. Breaching that duty, they said could result in the affected countries claiming compensation. Top UN court paves way to lawsuits over inadequate climate finance Judges also said states&#8217; responsibilities to tackle climate change are broader than their climate plans under the Paris Agreement and extend to ensuring people&#8217;s right to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment under international law. Government support for production and consumption of planet-heating fossil fuels may also “constitute an internationally wrongful act”, the opinion added.&nbsp; The ICJ&#8217;s ruling stemmed from a March 2023 UN resolution which was led by Vanuatu, after a group of law students presented the idea to their government back in 2019. Majority vote could sidestep opposition Regenvanu said on Monday it is important to follow through on the world top court&#8217;s opinion with a further resolution at the UN General Assembly because countries that are against it could prevent it moving forward in other fora like the UN climate negotiations, which require consensus for decisions. Some countries have already voiced objections ahead of COP30. In an informal consultation with delegations held earlier in September, Saudi Arabia&#8217;s negotiator said &#8220;there is no consensus among parties on the reference to the ICJ opinion&#8221;. &#8220;It&#8217;s not a negotiated outcome under this process nor is it the product of intergovernmental deliberation. It would therefore be inappropriate to reflect such opinion within our work,&#8221; he added. ICJ ruling expected to shape US climate lawsuits in defiance of Trump In New York, Regenvanu said opposition to a UN resolution is expected &#8220;from certain states&#8221; in line with their approach to climate action, which &#8220;does not yet reflect the urgency highlighted by science and international law”. “But unlike the UNFCCC processes, the UN General Assembly votes by majority… There is no veto power to block this resolution going through,” Regenvanu said. Vanuatu said the upcoming resolution would formally endorse the full ICJ opinion, propose measures to overcome barriers and inequalities in current climate frameworks, and reinforce multilateralism as the foundation for a fair and effective global response. The post Vanuatu pursues new UN resolution to turn ICJ climate opinion into action appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/09/23/vanuatu-new-un-resolution-icj-climate-opinion-action-legal-justice/)
