---
layout: feed_item
title: "Proposal for global minerals deal meets opposition as China looks away"
date: 2025-12-04 05:00:00 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['climate-costs', 'oceania', 'australia', 'renewable-energy', 'wind-power', 'fossil-fuels', 'emissions', 'economic-impacts', 'urgent', 'solar-power']
keywords: ['climate-costs', 'oceania', 'australia', 'global', 'wind-power', 'renewable-energy', 'proposal', 'minerals']
description: "Saudi Arabia, Russia and Iran are among countries opposed to discussing options for agreeing on global norms to protect people and the planet from the impact..."
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/12/04/proposal-for-global-minerals-deal-meets-opposition-as-china-looks-away/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Saudi Arabia, Russia and Iran are among countries opposed to discussing options for agreeing on global norms to protect people and the planet from the impacts of mining, processing and recycling minerals needed for the clean energy transition, documents seen by Climate Home News show. Environment officials gathered in Nairobi, Kenya, ahead of the UN Environment Assembly (UNEA) next week are discussing a resolution by Colombia and Oman that aims to make mineral supply chains more transparent and sustainable at a time when growing demand is spurring resource-rich countries to court investment and boost production. They have proposed the creation of an expert group to identify a range of binding and non-binding international instruments “for coordinated global action on the environmentally sound management of minerals and metals” from mining to recycling. The group would also look at how to handle mining waste and provide guidelines on recovering minerals from tailings responsibly. Those instruments could range from a global minerals treaty to a non-binding declaration or set of standards on best practice. The resolution is co-sponsored by Armenia, Ecuador and Zambia. Colombia has previously called for an international minerals treaty to define rules and standards that would make mineral value chains more transparent and accountable. China, US on the sidelines for now But Iran, Russia and Saudi Arabia, which is emerging as a major player in mineral supply chains, oppose launching a process that could lead to an international agreement on the issue, according to several sources and documents shared with Climate Home News. Countries will vote on the proposal next week, during the seventh session of UNEA, the world’s top decision-making body for environmental matters. China, which dominates the processing of 19 of 20 minerals deemed critical for the global economy, has so far stayed quiet about the proposal, but analysts said Beijing was unlikely to support any supranational initiative to govern mineral supply chains. China’s priority is “to remain sovereign throughout the process of how these minerals are produced and traded” and to promote cooperation “on its own terms”, said Christian-Géraud Neema, an expert on Chinese engagement in Africa’s transition minerals sector and the Africa editor of the China-Global South Project. Nov 28, 2025 Clean Energy Frontier EU refuses to review &#8220;strategic&#8221; mineral projects for energy transition Brussels says requests by NGOs to reassess the &#8220;strategic&#8221; designation of new mining projects because of environmental concerns are &#8220;unfounded&#8221; Read more Nov 26, 2025 Clean Energy Frontier South Africa’s platinum mine dumps get a second look as clean energy lifts demand Mining firms say extracting minerals from tailings is a sustainable way to boost global supplies, but local communities want to see benefits this time around Read more Nov 3, 2025 Clean Energy Frontier Self-taught mechanics give second life to Jordan’s glut of spent EV batteries As EV sales boom in Jordan, a lack of formal infrastructure for dealing with end-of-life batteries is leading to some innovative solutions Read more The US, which has been trying to counter China’s critical minerals clout, is not attending UNEA, while the EU – another major global market – is understood to broadly support the proposal.&nbsp; A spokesperson for the US State Department said: &#8220;Our team in Nairobi is focused on the US-Kenya relationship and delivering results for the American people, rather than litigating endless woke climate change theater.&#8221; The European Commission did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Several other countries have raised objections. Chile, a top producer of copper and lithium, wants to narrow the focus of the resolution to voluntary cooperation on illegal mining. In Africa, most countries back the Colombia-Oman proposal, but Uganda and Egypt oppose it, said Nsama Chikwanka, director of Publish What You Pay Zambia, an NGO focused on resource sovereignty. “Race to the bottom” Campaigners say countries should unite at UNEA to pave the way for talks on the issue, with some saying binding rules should be the eventual target. “The investments that are coming to countries like Zambia are from multinational enterprises and national laws are inadequate to ensure that robust standards are applied. So we need something that is internationally binding,” Chikwanka said. This comes after opposition from China and Russia thwarted a push by mineral-rich developing countries as well as the UK, the European Union and Australia to reflect the environmental and social risks associated with mining-related activities in the outcome of COP30. “What we are seeing at the moment is a huge race to the bottom of environmental standards at the same time as the impacts of mining are already immense,” said Johanna Sydow, a resource policy expert who heads the international environmental policy division of Germany&#8217;s Heinrich-Böll Foundation. “It is the chance now to create a long-lasting space for governments to work together on this issue,” she told Climate Home News. Farmers Nelson Banda and Elizabeth Bwalya stand in a field of maize burnt by a major acid spill at the Sino-Metals Leach Zambia copper mine in February (Photo: Stafrance Zulu) The race to extract minerals like lithium, nickel, copper, cobalt and rare earths needed to manufacture batteries, solar panels, wind turbines and other advanced digital and military technologies has led to growing cases of human rights violations, social conflict and environmental harms around the world. In Indonesia, nickel mining is fuelling deforestation, in Zambia, copper mining has led to catastrophic leaks of mining waste and in Latin America, Indigenous Peoples say the rush to extract lithium for batteries is trampling their rights. In 2024 alone, the Business and Human Rights Resource Centre recorded 156 allegations of human rights abuses linked to the mining of energy transition minerals. Counter-proposals favour non-binding measures Opposed to global discussions about possible binding tools to govern mineral supply chains, Saudi Arabia and Iran have instead suggested the creation of a technical platform that could review the impacts of mineral extraction in developing countries, explore options for support to address them, and advance voluntary cooperation on environmentally-sound practices. Digging beyond oil: Saudi Arabia bids to become a hub for energy transition minerals Saudi Arabia is already cooperating with mineral-rich nations on its own terms by investing billions of dollars in transition minerals abroad in a bid to become a global mineral processing hub that could become a counterweight to China’s dominance. China, meanwhile, threw its weight behind a G20 agreement on a voluntary and non-binding Critical Minerals Framework intended to ensure that mineral resources “become a driver of prosperity and sustainable development”. At the G20 leaders’ summit in South Africa last month, which was snubbed by the US, China also launched an economic and trade initiative on minerals, aiming to secure access to minerals in exchange for cooperation on technology, capacity-building and financing. Dec 3, 2025 Politics Trade breaks into agenda of UN climate talks &#8211; but will it have teeth? Governments have agreed to hold a set of dialogues on overlapping climate and trade policies and how they can enable development Read more Dec 2, 2025 News Tanzania pushed African nations to oppose fossil fuel transition at COP30 While chairing the African group at the summit, the gas-dependent nation advised the continent&#8217;s ministers to block language on transitioning away from fossil fuels Read more Dec 1, 2025 Energy For blighted Niger Delta communities, oil spill clean-ups are another broken promise Many local people are disappointed by efforts to repair the devastation left by foreign oil firms even as the Nigerian government plans to restart drilling Read more At least 19 countries, including Cambodia, Nigeria, Myanmar and Zimbabwe, alongside the UN Industrial Development Organisation, have reportedly joined the initiative. For Neema, of the China-Global South Project, this is an explicit attempt to counter resource diplomacy by the US, which is offering developing countries security and military support in exchange for minerals. “Producing countries in the Global South are more likely to be attracted by this approach because they know that the likelihood of Chinese companies and banks showing up is quite high,” he said. The post Proposal for global minerals deal meets opposition as China looks away appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/12/04/proposal-for-global-minerals-deal-meets-opposition-as-china-looks-away/)
