---
layout: feed_item
title: "RELEASE: World Resources Institute Welcomes New Chief Financial Officer and Chief People Officer"
date: 2025-05-28 19:14:43 +0000
categories: [social_impact]
external_url: https://www.wri.org/news/release-world-resources-institute-welcomes-new-chief-financial-officer-and-chief-people
is_feed: true
source_feed: "https://www.wri.org/blog/rss.xml"
feed_category: "social_impact"
---

Lucy Fernie to lead human resources strategy; Kote Lomidze to oversee global financial operationsWASHINGTON, D.C. (May 28, 2025) — World Resources Institute (WRI) is pleased to announce the appointment of two new senior leaders to its Global Executive Team: Lucy Fernie as Chief People Officer and Konstantin (Kote) Lomidze as Chief Financial Officer.Based in London, Lucy Fernie will lead WRI’s global People (HR) function, focusing on talent development, organizational culture and inclusion. She will also contribute to enhancing organizational effectiveness and managing change initiatives across the institute.Fernie brings a wealth of international HR leadership experience across NGOs, government and consulting sectors. Most recently, she served as Director of People, Organization, and Culture at the International Planned Parenthood Federation, overseeing regional HR teams, inclusion programs and organizational capability-building initiatives across multiple continents. Her previous roles include leading HR transformation projects at Adam Smith International and the Metropolitan Police Service in London, as well as consulting positions at PA Consulting and Deloitte, where she focused on leadership development and cultural change in large organizations.Fernie holds a Master’s degree in Occupational Psychology from Birkbeck, University of London. She is a qualified psychologist and a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development (CIPD).\"I've been passionate about climate change and nature for many years, so I’m humbled to join WRI and contribute to its vital mission”, said Lucy Fernie. “I’m excited to bring my global experience to the organization and to work with teams across WRI to ensure every employee can do their best work, fulfill their potential and enjoy a great employee experience.\" &nbsp;“Building an inclusive, resilient and empowered workforce is more critical than ever, especially for a global organization like WRI,” said Ani Dasgupta, President &amp; CEO of WRI. “Lucy brings a valuable combination of strategic vision and global experience, and most importantly, a deep commitment to people and to cultivating a strong, supportive organizational culture. I’m confident Lucy will help take our people strategy to the next level.” &nbsp;Kote Lomidze will oversee WRI’s financial operations worldwide. Based in Washington D.C., he will lead key functions including financial planning and analysis, grants and contracts and accounting. He will also serve as Treasurer to WRI’s Global Board of Directors.Lomidze brings over 25 years of experience in international development and nonprofit finance, with expertise in U.S. government funding regulations, audit and risk management and strategic growth. He has held senior leadership roles at global organizations including Project Concern International (PCI) and, most recently, World Learning, where he served as Chief Financial Officer and led major initiatives in financial planning, compliance, IT modernization and global operations across offices in Africa, Asia, Latin America and Eastern Europe.Lomidze is a Certified Public Accountant in Indiana and holds two bachelor’s degrees — in Law and Mathematical Economics — from Tbilisi State University, as well as an MBA from Georgetown University. He also serves on the Board of Directors of CORE Group, a global health nonprofit. &nbsp;\"WRI’s mission and global impact deeply resonate with me.” said Kote Lomidze. “I’ve long admired the organization’s commitment to data-driven, systems-based solutions that advance sustainability and equity. I’m excited to join such a passionate and innovative team and to contribute to WRI’s continued growth and financial resilience.\"“Kote’s depth of experience in nonprofit finance and global operations will be a tremendous asset to WRI”, said Ani Dasgupta. “His leadership will help ensure our financial systems are strong, agile and aligned with our mission as we grow and scale our impact around the world. I look forward to his partnership as we sustain and evolve WRI’s financial resilience into the future.”About World Resources Institute (WRI)&nbsp;WRI works to improve people’s lives, protect and restore nature and stabilize the climate. As an independent research organization, we leverage our data, expertise and global reach to influence policy and catalyze change across systems like food, land and water; energy; and cities. Our 2,000+ staff work on the ground in more than a dozen focus countries and with partners in over 50 nations.&nbsp;

[Read original article](https://www.wri.org/news/release-world-resources-institute-welcomes-new-chief-financial-officer-and-chief-people)
