---
layout: feed_item
title: "UN Human Rights Council fails to call out fossil fuels after decision cuts mention"
date: 2025-07-09 08:31:14 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['climate-summit', 'emissions', 'pacific-region', 'year-2023', 'oceania', 'cop29', 'urgent', 'public-health', 'cop28', 'climate-health']
keywords: ['climate-summit', 'rights', 'emissions', 'pacific-region', 'year-2023', 'oceania', 'human', 'council']
description: "A proposal by the Marshall Islands and Colombia calling for a transition away from fossil fuels at the UN Human Rights Council (UNHRC) failed to make it into..."
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/07/09/un-human-rights-council-fails-to-call-out-fossil-fuels-after-decision-cuts-mention/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

A proposal by the Marshall Islands and Colombia calling for a transition away from fossil fuels at the UN Human Rights Council (UNHRC) failed to make it into the council&#8217;s declaration on climate change and human rights issued on Tuesday. At a meeting in Geneva, the 47 member countries of the UNHRC held annual discussions on its annual resolution which encompasses various issues relevant to human rights, from conflicts to gender and education. This year, the UNHRC issued a resolution on human rights and climate change, calling on countries to deliver &#8220;deep and rapid cuts in global emissions&#8221; to minimise climate change impacts. It also urges states to meet the recently adopted $300-billion-a-year climate finance goal by 2035. On Monday, the Pacific island state and Colombia proposed an amendment calling on countries to achieve emissions cuts &#8220;by transitioning away from fossil fuels in energy systems, in a just, orderly and equitable manner&#8221;, replicating the language agreed at the COP28 climate summit in Dubai. But after closed-door negotiations, both countries removed the divisive draft proposal, clearing the way for the resolution to be adopted by consensus. Top Latin American court upholds right to “healthy climate”, urges fossil fuel control The Marshall Islands&#8217; ambassador to the UN, Doreen Debrum, said during the Council session that her country &#8220;places a high premium on collaboration, dialogue and consensus &#8211; and we were willing to recognise this by withdrawing our amendment&#8221;. &#8220;We look forward to working with all members of the Council &#8211; including our co-sponsors and the core group &#8211; to ensure this important issue continues to receive the attention it deserves,&#8221; she added. &#8220;Frustrating&#8221; resolution Sébastien Duyck, senior attorney at the Center for International Environmental Law (CIEL), welcomed parts of the UNHRC resolution, such as a call for finance to address loss and damage from climate impacts, but said the outcome on fossil fuels was &#8220;extremely frustrating&#8221;. &#8220;Some of the fossil fuel-producing countries are hellbent on delaying and rejecting any step that will help send political messages recognising the need to transition away from fossil fuels,&#8221; Duyck told Climate Home News. &#8220;It increases the disconnect between this resolution and the actual policies that we need to see.&#8221; COP30 president: Transition from fossil fuels can start without climate talks UN Special Rapporteur on Climate Change and Human Rights Elisa Morgera said &#8220;we can’t talk about protecting human rights from climate change without talking about &#8211; and taking urgent action on &#8211; phasing out fossil fuels.&#8221; Morgera recently presented a report to the UNHRC about the need to decarbonise economies in order to meet international human rights obligations. The report says the fossil fuel phase-out &#8220;should be understood as an important precondition for the right to development and the right to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment&#8221;. Since the adoption of the Dubai deal in 2023, governments have struggled to repeat explicit mentions to the fossil fuel transition in texts adopted by other international summits. Last year, at COP29 in Baku, Saudi Arabia opposed all mentions to fossil fuels in the conference decisions. Still, for Duyck, the UNHRC debate shows there is growing pressure from governments to call out fossil fuel production at international talks. &#8220;This is really becoming a topic in itself. Some countries are no longer willing to keep their head in the sand,&#8221; he added. The post UN Human Rights Council fails to call out fossil fuels after decision cuts mention appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/07/09/un-human-rights-council-fails-to-call-out-fossil-fuels-after-decision-cuts-mention/)
