---
layout: feed_item
title: "‘They’re playing games’: Illinois lawmakers press Trump administration over stalled lead-pipe funding"
date: 2025-11-14 00:16:43 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['year-2025', 'climate-health', 'public-health']
keywords: ['year-2025', 'public-health', 'they', 'games', 'climate-health', 'playing']
description: "At this point, no state has gotten rid of all of its toxic lead service lines, which pipe drinking water to homes and businesses"
external_url: https://grist.org/accountability/theyre-playing-games-illinois-lawmakers-press-trump-administration-over-stalled-lead-pipe-funding/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Grist"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Lead pipes are ubiquitous. At this point, no state has gotten rid of all of its toxic lead service lines, which pipe drinking water to homes and businesses. But some cities like Chicago, New York City, and Detroit, have more lead plumbing than others, and replacing it can cost tens of thousands of dollars. The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, the Biden-era infrastructure law, promised $15 billion for lead pipe replacements across the country to be disbursed over five years. But in a letter to the Environmental Protection Agency sent earlier this week, a group of Illinois congressional delegates allege that $3 billion appropriated for lead pipe replacements nationwide for the fiscal year that ended in September has not reached communities yet. They warn that the delay is a “dangerous politicization” that puts children and families at risk. “Federal resources are not partisan tools — they are vital lifelines intended to serve all Americans,” the letter notes. “Using federal funds as leverage against communities based on political considerations represents a dangerous abuse of power that undermines public trust and puts lives at risk.” The move comes as communities in Illinois, which is among the top five states with the&nbsp;most lead service lines, and across the country are grappling with the overwhelming cost of removing the hazardous metal piping from water systems. The Trump administration has already withheld congressionally appropriated funding for infrastructure and energy projects from Democrat-led states like New York, Colorado, Minnesota, New York, and Massachusetts. Now, lawmakers fear money for lead pipes is stuck in Washington too.&nbsp; “I think that they&#8217;re playing games,” said Representative Raja Krishnamoorthi, one of the lawmakers who led the effort to send the letter. “It feels like it&#8217;s targeting blue states or blue cities that might require more of this mitigation than other parts of the country.”&nbsp; Lead is toxic and dangerous to human health. Lead plumbing can flake and dissolve into drinking water, which can lead to brain damage, cardiovascular problems, and reproductive issues. The EPA advises that there is no safe level of lead exposure. A spokesperson for the federal agency said it is “actively working” on allotments for lead service line replacements. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, which is responsible for disbursing the federal funds to local governments, did not respond to a request for comment. The Chicago Department of Water Management said it received $14 million from the Illinois EPA for the 2025 financial year and was approved for $28 million for the next fiscal year.&nbsp;&nbsp; “The estimated replacement cost for the Chicago region alone is $12 billion or more, and statewide, it could be $14 billion,” Krishnamoorthi said. “Whatever amounts would come to Chicago would not be enough to do the entire job, but the federal component is vital to get the ball rolling.” Chicago has more than 412,000 lead service lines, the most of any city in the country. So far, the city has replaced roughly 14,000 lead pipes at a cost of $400 million over the past five years. That’s due in part to the high cost of replacing lead pipes. In Chicago, a single lead pipe replacement can cost on average $35,000. Federal rules require that Chicago replace all its pipes by 2047, but city officials have cited concerns over the unfunded federal mandate. “This is impacting people&#8217;s health,&#8221; said Chakena Sims, a senior policy advocate with Natural Resources Defense Council. “The federal government politicizing access to safe drinking water is an all-time low,” she added. “It&#8217;s encouraging to see our Illinois congressional leaders stand up for communities.”&nbsp;&nbsp; This story was originally published by Grist with the headline &#8216;They&#8217;re playing games&#8217;: Illinois lawmakers press Trump administration over stalled lead-pipe funding on Nov 13, 2025.

[Read original article](https://grist.org/accountability/theyre-playing-games-illinois-lawmakers-press-trump-administration-over-stalled-lead-pipe-funding/)
