---
layout: feed_item
title: "Boom in solar panel imports boosts hopes for clean energy take-off in Africa"
date: 2025-08-27 12:28:10 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['drought', 'solar-power', 'fossil-fuels', 'renewable-energy', 'year-2024', 'water-crisis', 'clean-energy', 'emissions']
keywords: ['drought', 'panel', 'solar-power', 'fossil-fuels', 'renewable-energy', 'boom', 'year-2024', 'solar']
description: "Ember called this the &#8220;first evidence of a take-off in solar in Africa&#8221;"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/08/27/boom-in-solar-panel-imports-boosts-hopes-for-clean-energy-take-off-in-africa/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Imports of solar panels from China to Africa rose sharply in the year to June, capable of generating 60% more electricity than imports in the previous 12 months according to a new analysis of Chinese export data by energy think-tank Ember. The solar panels imported from July 2024-June 2025 could provide 15 gigawatts (GW) of electricity to the continent &#8211; long left out of the global solar boom &#8211; up from 9 GW during the year before. Ember called this the &#8220;first evidence of a take-off in solar in Africa&#8221;. The growth was led by countries that have suffered widespread power cuts like South Africa, Nigeria and Zambia, where solar panels are increasingly appealing to businesses and households seeking reliable power without having to use expensive diesel generators. South Africa has suffered black-outs caused by old and unreliable coal-fired power plants and transmission systems, while drought has reduced the amount of hydropower available to Zambia. But the sharpest growth was in exports to Algeria, which went from barely importing any solar panels to importing 1.2 GW in this period. Report author Dave Jones told Climate Home that large solar farms are being built in the North African nation. Jones, who is director of Ember&#8217;s global insights programme, said &#8220;the take-off of solar in Africa is a pivotal moment&#8221;, adding that solar is the world&#8217;s cheapest electricity source and has &#8220;vast potential to transform the African continent&#8221;. The analysis adds that imports of solar panels help to reduce total energy-related imports, as African countries then have to buy in less oil and diesel from other countries. The savings from avoiding diesel can repay the cost of a solar panel within six months in Nigeria, and even sooner in other countries, it says. Fast but flawed data Despite the boom, the analysis points out that solar import growth is not as fast as in other parts of the world. It notes that Pakistan imported more solar panels in this time than the whole African continent despite having one-sixth of the population. The report&#8217;s authors warn that the data only shows exports of solar panels to Africa rather than how many of them are installed in Africa. Sometimes, panels may be re-exported to neighbouring countries, reshipped outside of the continent to avoid tariffs or taxes, or remain in storage for long periods. Data on the amount of solar power installed in Africa in this period will not be published for about a year, Jones said. Jul 1, 2025 Sponsored How off-grid solar is beating the odds to transform lives in rural Africa By embracing solar power, many African countries are seeing improvements in electricity access, but financial barriers remain Read more May 19, 2025 Energy Nigerian president&#8217;s solar panels stir debate over renewables for the rich Solar systems are a solution to Nigeria’s frequent power cuts and inadequate grid coverage &#8211; but only for those who can afford them Read more Aug 20, 2025 News &#8220;Epic&#8221; effort needed to hit 2050 nuclear power target, experts say Nuclear energy is back in favour as a low-emissions alternative to fossil fuels, but high costs and long build times make a goal to triple capacity by 2050 seem a tall order Read more Muhammad Mustafa Amjad, programme director at Renewables First, said tracking these additions is what makes the difference between “a messy shift and an organised, accelerated one”, adding that “bottom-up energy transitions fueled by cheap solar are no longer a choice &#8211; they’re our future”. He added that not monitoring the situation means losing time and opportunities. “Africa’s transition will happen regardless, but with timely data it can be more equitable, planned and inclusive,” he added. Global Energy Monitor&#8217;s map of under construction utility-scale solar farms. This does not show solar panels on the rooftops of homes and businesses. The data only shows exports of solar panels from China. But, as China produces 80% of the world&#8217;s solar panels, it gives a good indication of total solar panel imports and installations. Some African countries are looking to reduce their reliance for solar panels on China. Nigeria, for example, has been positioning itself to become a solar manufacturing hub in Africa. Earlier this year, it announced plans to ban solar equipment imports to boost local manufacturing.&nbsp; Morocco recently doubled its manufacturing to 1 GW per year, while South Africa has similar capacity. There are much smaller manufacturing lines in some countries including Egypt and Nigeria, the report added. The post Boom in solar panel imports boosts hopes for clean energy take-off in Africa appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2025/08/27/boom-in-solar-panel-imports-boosts-hopes-for-clean-energy-take-off-in-africa/)
