---
layout: feed_item
title: "Challenging Discriminatory Cultural Norms to Build Fair, Resilient Communities in Sub-Saharan Africa"
date: 2025-11-21 16:07:30 +0000
categories: [social_impact]
tags: ['economic-impacts', 'climate-costs']
keywords: ['challenging', 'discriminatory', 'climate-costs', 'economic-impacts', 'cultural']
description: "For instance, in many parts of the world, domestic and caregiving responsibilities often prevent women from engaging in paid work"
external_url: https://www.wri.org/update/challenging-discriminatory-cultural-norms-fair-resilient-communities-sub-saharan-africa
is_feed: true
source_feed: "wri.org blog posts"
feed_category: "social_impact"
---

Social norms and gender biases are widely recognized as major barriers to the social and economic empowerment of women, people with disabilities and other underrepresented groups, including limiting their participation in governance and decision-making. For instance, in many parts of the world, domestic and caregiving responsibilities often prevent women from engaging in paid work. Even when women contribute to household income, evidence suggests that they have limited control over spending and saving decisions. Research also shows that they are at higher risk of gender-based violence when they’re perceived to earn more than their male partners.SUNCASA seeks to address these challenges in urban communities in Africa. Led by the International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD) and WRI, with support from local partners and funding from Global Affairs Canada, this three-year SUNCASA project works to promote fair and inclusive nature-based solutions (NbS) that help communities adapt to climate change in Dire Dawa, Ethiopia; Kigali, Rwanda; and Johannesburg, South Africa. The project aims to reduce the barriers that women and other underrepresented groups face in fully participating in traditionally male-dominated NbS activities — such as nursery development, urban greening, landscape restoration and agroforestry. &nbsp;A key goal of this project is to ensure that at least half of all project participants are from underrepresented groups, and the project’s commitment to gender equality and social inclusion does not end there. SUNCASA’s partners — HCS Gender Desk in Dire Dawa, AVEGA-Agahozo in Kigali, and GenderCC in Johannesburg —&nbsp; design and facilitate training programs and community dialogues that help address the long-term barriers restricting the participation of women, youth, the elderly and people with disabilities in NbS activities.&nbsp; Participants in one of the GESI training sessions in Dire Dawa, Ethiopia. Photo by Hararghe Catholic Secretariate Building on insights gathered from an initial assessment, these training programs were designed with two related goals. The first was to challenge social norms and gender biases within the NbS worker groups. The second was to hold open discussions among the workers’ families — especially the husbands of female NbS workers — to promote shared household responsibilities and prevent backlash against women participating in male-dominated jobs.Together, these initiatives aimed to build a stronger base for more inclusive green jobs in NbS activities across the three cities.More than 600 community members took part in the training sessions, including NbS workers, local leaders and elders who play a key role in shaping community norms and changing attitudes. The sessions introduced participants to key GESI concepts such as the difference between “equality” and “equity” and between “gender” and “sex.” They were then shown how social norms and gender biases are shaped by society and can change over time.One young woman from Kigali noted, \\"I always thought gender was just another word for sex, especially when we talk about ‘gender balance’ as a way to support women’s rights. Now I see that gender is something we learn from society and is not the same as being a woman.\\" A GESI training session in Kigali. Photo by Avega-Agahozo The training also discussed how gender norms are not just women’s issues; both men and women can be affected by harmful gender norms. A male participant from Dire Dawa shared, “If males are engaged in culturally ascribed women’s roles, neighbors and the community give names that ridicule men and that discourage and shame them to engage.”&nbsp;&nbsp;Through open dialogue, the sessions encouraged participants to challenge harmful assumptions about gender roles — and collectively reflect on how these roles can shift. In Kigali, an older male participant shared, \\"In the past, we used to have women’s roles and men’s roles, but with the development and the cost of living becoming expensive, it’s no longer the case! Men cook food and take care of kids, which was not the case in the past.\\"Similarly, in Johannesburg, a young man shared how he subverted gender expectations. \\"I was left alone to look after my niece, and I could not change a diaper, and nobody could teach me as both parents were at work! But guess what I did: I went on Google and learned how to change a diaper and these days I am so close to my niece, as I know how to look after her and feed her.\\" &nbsp;These realizations, especially from the couples’ dialogues, helped raise awareness around how families can support women’s engagement in NbS opportunities and encourage a shared responsibility of household chores. GESI training sessions conducted by Gender CC in Johannesburg. Photo by Alexandra Water Warriors While the trainings made important progress in raising awareness and highlighting positive stories of change, participants also acknowledged that significant transformation would take time. A woman from Dire Dawa shared, \\"Before the training, we didn’t know if our male (family members) can be engaged in the domestic role, example cooking and baking. Now we know and we will practice after the training.\\"&nbsp;An elderly couple from Ija Eneni kebele in Dire Dawa echoed this sentiment, emphasizing the value of the training, particularly the couples’ dialogues: “Though we are too old to engage in the various activities assigned to everyone else, still the training enables us to teach and advise our children.”&nbsp; GESI training sessions conducted by Gender CC in Johannesburg. Photo by Alexandra Water Warriors As participants shared their experiences and challenged social norms, it became clear that achieving gender equity and social inclusion requires both collective efforts and ongoing dialogue. Post-training surveys revealed promising results. Participants reported a stronger understanding of how gender and social norms influence inclusion in the NbS sector. It also revealed growing support from both community and family members for women taking part in these spaces.Many participants plan to share the lessons they learned with others in their communities. In Kigali, for example, 45 trained couples will keep engaging in meaningful dialogues and complete practical homework assignments to apply at home. In addition, SUNCASA’s GESI experts will focus on strengthening the capacity of local governments to promote and practice NbS planning and implementation centered on GESI principles.&nbsp;This initiative aims to plant the seeds for transformative changes in attitudes and behaviors, shaping future strategies to ensure everyone — regardless of gender or other social factors — can actively contribute to and benefit from NbS for climate change adaptation. As one local leader from Kigali said: “The world cannot be just unless all barriers related to gender are addressed.”&nbsp;The authors greatly appreciate the dedication and competence shown by the GESI experts from SUNCASA’s partner organizations toward successfully delivering these activities in the three cities — Bertha Chiroro (Gender CC), Cleopatre Cyezimana (AVEGA), Emebet Belete (HCS), Gisele Umuhoza (AVEGA), Hadas Temesegen (HCS), Ndivile Mokoena (Gender CC), Patrick Shyaka (AVEGA), Rediat Tassew Mezgebu (HCS) and Theogene Niyirora (AVEGA)

[Read original article](https://www.wri.org/update/challenging-discriminatory-cultural-norms-fair-resilient-communities-sub-saharan-africa)
