---
layout: feed_item
title: "Afghanistan: Asia and the Pacific: Regional Humanitarian Snapshot (1 - 20 April 2026)"
date: 2026-04-23 15:15:54 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['renewable-energy', 'wind-power', 'cyclone', 'year-2026', 'pacific-region', 'oceania', 'urgent', 'tropical-storms']
keywords: ['renewable-energy', 'afghanistan', 'wind-power', 'asia', 'cyclone', 'year-2026', 'pacific', 'pacific-region']
description: "Country: Afghanistan Source: UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Please refer to the attached file"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/afghanistan/asia-and-pacific-regional-humanitarian-snapshot-1-20-april-2026
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: Afghanistan Source: UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Please refer to the attached file. AFGHANISTAN Ongoing cross-border hostilities between Afghanistan and Pakistan have continued, with casualties and damage to civilian infrastructure being reported, and access constrained by insecurity and explosive hazards. Shelling, armed clashes, anti-aircraft gunfire and drone activity have been reported during April. Civilian casualties that have been reported since the start of the conflict include women and children, as well as an aid worker. On 16 April, a woman was killed in Dangam district, Kunar Province, due to shelling, and on the previous day, three people were reportedly killed in Pakistan's Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province as a result of shelling from Afghanistan. A school in Kunar was also struck on 15 April, causing severe damage but no reported casualties. Despite last week's reopening of the Nari–Kamdesh road after a two-month closure, UN road missions remain suspended and most border crossings remain closed. More than 94,000 people have been displaced across Khost, Kunar, Nangarhar, Paktia, Paktika and Nuristan, with needs assessments ongoing in hard-to-reach areas. Humanitarian partners are providing response in line with ongoing assessments. MYANMAR Armed hostilities continued through the Myanmar New Year period, with airstrikes, drone attacks and ground operations driving civilian casualties, displacement and the destruction of homes and infrastructure. Between 1 and 19 April 2026, at least 30 civilians were reportedly killed and dozens injured across Magway, Mandalay and Sagaing regions in northwestern Myanmar, as well as in Rakhine State. In northwestern Myanmar, violence affected both villages and displacement sites, including the destruction of more than 400 houses in Pakokku Township and temporary shelters in Pauk Township in Magway Region. On 19 April, military operations in Pauk Township displaced nearly 5,000 people, while an airstrike in Sagaing Township, Sagaing Region, displaced around 1,000 people. On 2 April, airstrikes hit a temporary hospital in Monywa Township, Sagaing Region, damaging buildings and medical supplies. In Rakhine State, airstrikes in Minbya and other townships displaced more than 200 people in the first week of April, many sheltering along riverbanks amid fears of renewed hostilities. PAPUA NEW GUINEA Tropical Cyclone Maila developed in the Solomon Sea and intensified into a Category 3 severe tropical cyclone on 6 April 2026. The system moved slowly between 6 and 7 April, significantly increasing the prolonged rainfall, coastal inundation, and strong winds across affected areas. It further intensified into a Category 5 cyclone on 8 April, causing widespread impacts in provinces along its path. Due to its slow movement, TC Maila generated severe impacts, including catastrophic wind gusts, intense and sustained rainfall, and structural damage. The most affected locations include the Autonomous Region of Bougainville and Milne Bay. The National Disaster Centre's National Emergency Operations Centre (NDC-NEOC), continues to coordinate the government-led response operations in close collaboration with provincial authorities, security forces, and the Disaster Management Team (DMT). To date, assessments have identified that 13,500 people have been affected, of whom more than 12,000 are in need of humanitarian assistance. Bougainville has transitioned into stabilisation phase, with a focus on restoring access, resettling affected populations, and conducting detailed damage and needs assessments. Response activities remain ongoing across East New Britain, Milne Bay, Manus, and New Ireland provinces, with varying levels of access and assessment progress. Humanitarian partners continue to support the response through assessments, relief distributions, and cash‑based assistance. JAPAN A strong and shallow 7.4-magnitude earthquake struck northern Japan on 20 April, with Japan's Meteorological Agency (JMA) issuing a tsunami warning for waves up to 3m in Iwate prefecture and parts of Hokkaido. The tremor was strong enough to shake large buildings as far as Tokyo, hundreds of kilometres away. All tsunami advisories were lifted by midnight of the same day, with the highest recorded tsunami wave measuring 80 cm observed in Iwate Prefecture. The Fire and Disaster Management Agency reported three injuries in Iwate and Aomori prefectures. Meanwhile, the Cabinet Office issued an advisory for an increased risk of earthquakes of magnitude 8 or higher occurring in the Pacific coastal areas of Hokkaido and northern Honshu until 27 April. Residents of 182 cities and towns across seven prefectures were advised to take additional precautionary measures.

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/afghanistan/asia-and-pacific-regional-humanitarian-snapshot-1-20-april-2026)
