---
layout: feed_item
title: "Bonn Bulletin: Tackling climate crisis is 'hardest' challenge ever, Stiell says"
date: 2026-06-08 12:29:47 +0000
categories: [media]
tags: ['australia', 'media-coverage', 'fossil-fuels', 'climate-communication', 'food-security', 'emissions', 'climate-policy', 'agriculture', 'clean-energy', 'year-2023']
keywords: ['australia', 'bonn', 'bulletin', 'media-coverage', 'fossil-fuels', 'climate-communication', 'food-security', 'tackling']
description: "Kicking off proceedings at the mid-year climate talks in Bonn amid fraught global geopolitics, UN climate chief Simon Stiell told delegates that tackling the..."
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/06/08/bonn-bulletin-tackling-climate-crisis-hardest-human-challenge-ever-stiell-says/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "media"
---

Kicking off proceedings at the mid-year climate talks in Bonn amid fraught global geopolitics, UN climate chief Simon Stiell told delegates that tackling the global climate crisis is 'the hardest, but most important, thing humanity has ever tried to do together'. Perhaps hoping to forestall the usual diplomatic wrangling that routinely bogs down the talks, he warned governments that there is no time to 're-open past debates or renegotiate commitments already made'. Instead, he added, there is an imperative to accelerate real-world action as deadly heat intensifies and the fossil-fuel cost crisis sparked by the Iran war strangles economies, 'taking a wrecking ball to lives and prosperity'. That message seemed to sink in with the negotiators in Bonn, where the opening session kicked off only an hour late and was not marred by agenda rows, which delayed the start of the talks by a day last year. On bridging the gap between the negotiations and the real economy, Stiell called for elevating the Global Climate Action Agenda, a goal long promised but never fully delivered. But, he added, Türkiye – working with Australia – is now building on the efforts by last year's COP30 presidency to streamline this process into six thematic areas, including boosting energy and food security, curbing methane and strengthening the resilience of cities. What to expect from the Bonn climate talks Stiell was also keen to stress that the formal negotiations remain central to driving implementation of the Paris Agreement. He urged governments in Bonn to advance key issues including the Global Goal on Adaptation, the delivery of the outcomes of the first Global Stocktake and the development of a new just transition mechanism. The first Global Stocktake was an assessment of countries' collective progress in meeting the goals of the Paris Agreement, which led to a 2023 agreement to transition away from fossil fuels in energy systems and a 2030 goal to triple renewable energy, among other things. Hinting at upcoming reforms to the UN climate regime – which has often been accused of failing to keep pace with advancements in the real world – Stiell said all institutions must continuously evolve and improve. The UN climate secretariat has heard countries' calls to work more efficiently, support access to climate finance and reduce the reporting burden on governments, he added. Türkiye to outline targets for Action Agenda While Australia will run the negotiations at COP31, for co-host Türkiye – which is organising the talks in Antalya – the focus is on the so-called Global Climate Action Agenda. This is a sprawling smorgasbord of around 500 voluntary initiatives bringing together governments, businesses, investors, cities and civil society. It covers everything from strengthening power grids for clean energy, to restoring degraded forests and land, and reducing emissions from buildings. COP31 President-Designate Murat Kurum told the opening session of the Bonn talks his team will present the 'main framework' of the Action Agenda on Tuesday, adding it will be 'based on concrete and tangible targets'. He also said Türkiye will announce a roadmap for translating what happens in the negotiations into the real world, which will 'point to a science-based process with highly clear and defined outcomes' and steps for getting there. 'In the second decade of the Paris Agreement, the COP31 Action Agenda will bring the outcomes of the first Global Stocktake to life, and we will make a strong start to the second decade,' Kurum said. In a joint letter issued in May, the two host nations said COP31 will be shaped as an 'Implementation COP' and a 'COP of the Future,' aimed at translating commitments into tangible and trackable progress. They outlined priority areas – to be achieved through the six axes of the Action Agenda defined ahead of COP30 – including electrification, zero waste, resilient cities, sustainable agriculture, green industrial transformation and climate finance. Electrification emerges as COP31 priority Chiming with this, Australia's Chris Bowen, the COP31 president of negotiations, made the global energy transition the centerpiece of his opening intervention in Bonn. This year's climate summit, he said, must send investors and corporations the message that countries are 'collectively committed' to building up renewable energy and reducing fossil fuel reliance. Fossil fuels were not directly mentioned in the main outcome at COP30 last year after countries failed to agree on developing a global transition roadmap, which Brazil is now putting together outside of formal negotiations. Bowen, Australia's minister of climate change and energy, said that, while energy crises like the one the world is going through now will become more frequent and more unpredictable, accelerating the shift to cleaner sources will 'ease shocks to our energy systems'. He identified progress on electrification as a priority for COP31, pointing to an assessment by the International Energy Agency (IEA) that electricity's share of final energy consumption needs to reach 35% by 2035 to keep the 1.5C temperature goal in sight. 'In a world of geopolitical uncertainty and energy disruption, the transition is not a risk,' Bowen added, 'it is the solution and an immense opportunity'. The opening plenary at the June Climate Meetings in Bonn, June 8, 2026. (Photo: UN Climate Change/Lara Murillo) The opening plenary at the June Climate Meetings in Bonn, June 8, 2026. (Photo: UN Climate Change/Lara Murillo) Tensions around trade and climate surface again Over the weekend, it became clear that discussions on trade and climate would once again become a source of contention between countries – if not as explosively as they did at the start of the talks a year ago. As agreed in the COP30 Global Mutirão decision, a series of dialogues on trade and climate will be held in Bonn yearly from 2026 to 2028. Climate Home News has confirmed that the G77 + China has expressed their discontent about a lack of clarity in the organisation of the first dialogue that will take place on June 13. In a statement at the opening plenary, Uruguay, on behalf of the G77 group of developing nations, 'encouraged Parties to engage constructively in the dialogue in a robust and structured manner'. Many Global South countries have been concerned that international trade measures to make products greener, such as the European Union's carbon levy on imports, could end up discriminating against them. Russia warned during its opening statement that the new dialogue should not be used to create trade barriers. Comment: Indonesia's failing Just Energy Transition Partnership is a cautionary tale Avantika Goswami, climate change and green economy programme manager at the India-based Centre for Science and Environment, told Climate Home News that the UN climate secretariat has been unclear and untransparent about what will be discussed at the dialogue. 'We don't know if observers and civil society are going to be able to contribute,' she added. After the three mid-year dialogues, in 2028 there will be a high-level event for countries to exchange their views and experiences, and the officials in charge will have to present a report summarising these discussions. At Monday's opening session, Antwi-Boasiako Amoah, the Ghanian chair of the African Group of Negotiators, said it would be 'important to provide clarity on how they intend to present the report' and suggested that the co-chairs of the Bonn talks should consult with countries on how best to do that. The post Bonn Bulletin: Tackling climate crisis is 'hardest' challenge ever, Stiell says appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/06/08/bonn-bulletin-tackling-climate-crisis-hardest-human-challenge-ever-stiell-says/)
