---
layout: feed_item
title: "Renewables create fewer jobs globally as energy transition enters “new phase”"
date: 2026-01-11 06:04:15 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['climate-costs', 'emissions', 'wind-power', 'year-2024', 'fossil-fuels', 'renewable-energy', 'economic-impacts', 'clean-energy', 'solar-power']
keywords: ['climate-costs', 'emissions', 'create', 'year-2024', 'fossil-fuels', 'fewer', 'renewables', 'wind-power']
description: "Jobs in renewable energy expanded only slightly in 2024 to reach 16"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/01/11/renewables-create-fewer-jobs-globally-as-energy-transition-enters-new-phase/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Jobs in renewable energy expanded only slightly in 2024 to reach 16.6 million worldwide, new figures show, suggesting that the industry&#8217;s ability to create employment is slowing as it matures. &nbsp; According to an annual report from the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) and the International Labour Organization (ILO), the number of renewables jobs rose by just 2.3% between 2023 and 2024. This was partly due to Chinese solar manufacturers already producing more components than they could sell, and laying off workers to cut costs. Other factors included a shift from rooftop solar installations to utility-scale systems in major markets like India and Germany, as well as increasing automation in the sector – a trend that is expected to accelerate with the use of robots, drones and artificial intelligence. Employment in the sector has risen steadily from 7.3 million in 2012, when the data series began, along with the increase in solar, wind and geothermal energy, hydropower and biofuels around the world. But far fewer new jobs were created in 2024 &#8211; 400,000 &#8211; compared with 2023, which saw a jump of 2.5 million. Jan 9, 2026 News Israel’s fossil gas power play pushes climate action to the sidelines Even as it faces international condemnation over the Gaza war, Israel is working to boost natural gas exports and offshore exploration to strengthen its strategic and regional ties Read more Jan 8, 2026 Politics Saudi Arabia issues last-minute climate plan with unclear emissions-cutting goal Saudi Arabia&#8217;s NDC suggests the baseline for the 2040 target could be revised and meeting it will depend on revenues from continued oil exports Read more Jan 7, 2026 News What would Trump’s Venezuela oil plans mean for climate change? While Trump&#8217;s aim of boosting oil production in Venezuela could worsen climate change, high costs and an oversupplied market might make investors think twice Read more In a foreword to the report released on Sunday, IRENA Director-General Francesco La Camera and ILO Director-General Gilbert F. Houngbo wrote that the slowdown in the rate of job creation points to “the emergence of a new phase in the energy transition”. “Growing automation and economies of scale mean that comparatively less human labour is required for each new unit of capacity – although impacts vary across countries, technologies and segments of the renewable energy value chain,” they said. IRENA currently projects that, with the right policies in place, the renewable energy workforce could expand to 30 million jobs by 2030. But the latest figures – which do not reflect the impact of Donald Trump’s squashing of US renewables incentives in 2025 – indicate reaching that level could be a stretch. Michael Renner, IRENA’s head of socioeconomics and policy, told Climate Home News on the sidelines of the agency’s assembly in Abu Dhabi that, in the past 10-20 years, the renewable energy sector has been far more labour-intensive than the fossil fuel industry &#8211; which has largely been automated &#8211; but the difference is starting to narrow. “I think renewables are still looking favourable [for job creation], and I don&#8217;t think that advantage will be lost &#8211; but I think it will be less massive, less dramatic,” he added. Notes: a) Includes liquid biofuels, solid biomass and biogas. b) Direct jobs only. c) “Others” includes geothermal energy, concentrated solar power, heat pumps (ground based), municipal and industrial waste, and ocean energy. Source: IRENA / Renewable Energy and Jobs Annual Review 2025 Notes: a) Includes liquid biofuels, solid biomass and biogas. b) Direct jobs only. c) “Others” includes geothermal energy, concentrated solar power, heat pumps (ground based), municipal and industrial waste, and ocean energy. Source: IRENA / Renewable Energy and Jobs Annual Review 2025 Geographical imbalances The world needs to add a huge amount of solar, wind, hydro and geothermal capacity to meet a global goal of tripling renewable power capacity to reach 11.2 terawatts (TW) by the end of the decade. That will require installing an average of about 1.1 TW each year from 2025 to 2030, which is about double the power added in 2024, IRENA says. In a statement on the jobs report, La Camera noted that renewable energy deployment is “booming, but the human side of the story is as important as the technological side”. He pointed to geographical imbalances in the deployment of clean energy and related job creation. Africa has particularly struggled to attract foreign investment in building out renewables, with much of the growth currently concentrated in Asia. Outdated geological data limits Africa’s push to benefit from its mineral wealth “Countries that are lagging behind in the energy transition must be supported by the international community,” La Camera said. “This is essential not only to meet the goal of tripling renewable power capacity by 2030, but also to ensure that socioeconomic benefits become lived realities for all, helping to shore up popular support for the transition.” Some countries like Nigeria are trying to boost their solar equipment manufacturing supply chains, with the government saying it plans to ban solar panel imports, and two large assembly plants announced to support public electrification programmes. China leads on jobs but solar stumbles In 2024, China was home to nearly half &#8211; 44% &#8211; of the world’s renewable energy jobs with an estimated 7.3 million. But in that year, employment in its solar photovoltaics (PV) sector actually contracted slightly, as five leading manufacturers cut their workforce. This was in response to efforts by the Chinese government to curb what it has dubbed “disorderly” competition by reducing excess capacity across the solar PV supply chain, in a bid to boost prices and product quality. Renewables jobs stayed flat in the European Union in 2024, meanwhile, at 1.8 million jobs, and India and the US saw small rises, accounting for 1.3 million and 1.1 million respectively. Brazil was also a big employer, with 1.4 million jobs, partly thanks to its biofuels industry based on soy and sugarcane. Trump to pull US out of UN climate convention and climate science body On the impact of Trump’s efforts to roll back incentives and subsidies for green energy in the US, Renner said it will likely mean fewer new renewable power installations, with the report documenting examples of solar and wind projects that were cancelled or halted in 2025. He also noted the dampening effects of US tariff hikes on the production of solar panels in Southeast Asia, which has led to job losses in some countries including Thailand, while others such as India have been able to increase their exports to the US thanks to relatively lower taxes on their exports. Limited opportunities for women and people with disabilities &nbsp; The report also highlights a lack of progress on increasing women workers in the renewables industry. While higher than in fossil fuels, it has plateaued at about one job in three. Those jobs are concentrated in administrative roles, which account for 45% of female employment in renewable energy, as well as in technical positions unrelated to science, technology or engineering, such as legal work. The report calls for greater efforts by companies, education and skills training bodies to open up more opportunities for women in clean energy, as well as for people with disabilities who face high barriers to participating in labour markets across the board, with only three in 10 being employed worldwide. There are some positive cases where proactive policies have made a difference, such as in India’s electric vehicle industry, which has a relatively high level of women at the management level. How Belém launched the Just Transition mechanism In Brazil, meanwhile, national legislation requires companies with more than 100 employees to reserve 2-5% of jobs for people with disabilities, including those in renewable energy. And in Spain, energy utility Endesa and municipalities trained over 300 people with intellectual and psycho-social disabilities in tasks like vegetation management and composting at solar energy sites, with nearly 40% securing jobs after six months. ILO’s Houngbo called for greater efforts on disability inclusion in the clean energy transition, not just as a matter of justice but also to advance resilient labour markets and sustainable development. “This requires accessible training systems, inclusive hiring practices, and workplaces that accommodate, welcome and respond to diverse needs and respect every worker’s rights,” he added. Climate Home News received support from IRENA to travel to Abu Dhabi to covers its 16th Assembly. The post Renewables create fewer jobs globally as energy transition enters &#8220;new phase&#8221; appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/01/11/renewables-create-fewer-jobs-globally-as-energy-transition-enters-new-phase/)
