---
layout: feed_item
title: "Somalia & Somaliland - May 2026 Snapshot Report"
date: 2026-06-17 13:44:28 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['drought', 'climate-health', 'urgent', 'year-2026', 'water-crisis', 'public-health']
keywords: ['drought', 'somaliland', 'climate-health', 'urgent', 'year-2026', 'water-crisis', 'somalia', 'snapshot']
description: "Country: Somalia Source: Talk to Loop Please refer to the attached file"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/somalia-somaliland-may-2026-snapshot-report
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: Somalia Source: Talk to Loop Please refer to the attached file. The feedback from communities this month reveals continued humanitarian crises in Somalia's Lower Juba and Lower Shabelle regions, where displacement, drought, and inflation have created acute needs especially amongst minority communities. Food security (34%) and livelihood assistance (32%) dominate requests. The continued dominance of food security and livelihood-related requests aligns with the May 2026 PC Projection Update1, which estimated that six million people across Somalia were facing Crisis or Emergency levels of food insecurity amid rising food prices, livelihood deterioration, displacement, and declining humanitarian assistance. On the other hand, WASH needs have decreased significantly to 11%. Women and children constitute the most vulnerable groups. ‍ ⬆2% of people cited Aid effectiveness issues specifically concerns around the inclusivity and accessibility of Aid, and organisational responsiveness increased to 14% of tagged feedback. ‍ Loop handled 102 sensitive cases in May, reflecting a significant rise from 69 cases in April (+48%). Service-level concerns increased this month, accounting for 81% of all eedback (83 reports), including 48 service-level complaints and 35 non-sensitive assistance requests. The increase in service-level complaints and concerns regarding aid accessibility may reflect wider funding constraints aﬀecting humanitarian operations in Somalia. During May, humanitarian agencies reported2 significant reductions in assistance coverage due to funding shortfalls. Complaints mainly related to delays, non-payment, and lack of follow-up after registration, while assistance requests primarily concerned cash, food and nutrition, health, and education support. Half of service-level complaints originated from Lower Juba. ‍ Protection-related concerns decreased to 16% of all feedback (16 reports), continuing the downward trend observed since February. GBV remained the most reported protection concern, while fraud, corruption, and aid diversion reports declined significantly to 3%, with the three reported cases mainly concerning allegations of improper influence in registration processes. ‍ Most sensitive reports were submitted by individuals on their own behalf (89%), with women and girls accounting for 56% of all sensitive feedback, reflecting a slight decline compared to previous months. Reporting from persons with disabilities increased to 10%, mainly concerning service-level complaints and follow-up after registration. ‍ Reports from minority and marginalised communities remained stable at 32%, with most originating from internally displaced individuals and primarily related to service-level concerns. Geographically, sensitive reports were received from 11 regions, with three-quarters of submissions concentrated in Lower Juba, Lower Shabelle, Banadir , and Galgaduud. ‍ Total feedback volume A total of 35 referrals were made, including 19 assistance-related referrals and 16 referrals related to allegations (corruption, fraud, and service-level complaints). Overall, 71% of referrals were acknowledged, with higher acknowledgement for assistance-related referrals (89%) compared to allegation-related referrals (50%).

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/somalia-somaliland-may-2026-snapshot-report)
