---
layout: feed_item
title: "6 Ways to Remove Carbon Pollution from the Atmosphere"
date: 2026-02-04 17:00:00 +0000
categories: [social_impact]
tags: ['fossil-fuels', 'solar-power', 'sea-level-rise', 'extreme-weather', 'carbon-capture', 'climate-science', 'emissions', 'wind-power', 'agriculture', 'clean-energy']
keywords: ['fossil-fuels', 'solar-power', 'sea-level-rise', 'carbon', 'extreme-weather', 'carbon-capture', 'remove', 'ways']
description: "Since the Industrial Revolution, humans have emitted more than 2,000 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere"
external_url: https://www.wri.org/insights/6-ways-remove-carbon-pollution-sky
is_feed: true
source_feed: "wri.org blog posts"
feed_category: "social_impact"
---

Since the Industrial Revolution, humans have emitted more than 2,000 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. (A gigatonne is one billion metric tons.)This concentration of CO2 and other greenhouse gases in the air causes the climate change impacts we’re experiencing today, from forest fires to stifling heat waves and damaging sea level rise — and the global community is still emitting more each year. Unless we make serious changes, climate impacts will only continue to intensify.The imperative for combating climate change is to curb emissions rapidly — for example, by ramping up renewable energy, boosting energy efficiency, halting deforestation and curbing super pollutants like hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs). The latest assessment of climate science from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) tells us, however, that these efforts alone aren’t enough.To keep global temperature rise to less than 1.5 degrees C (2.7 degrees F), which scientists say is necessary for preventing the worst impacts of climate change, we’ll need to not only reduce emissions but also remove and store some carbon that’s already in the atmosphere. &nbsp;What Is Carbon Dioxide Removal?Carbon dioxide removal (or simply “carbon removal”) aims to help mitigate climate change by removing carbon dioxide pollution directly from the atmosphere. Carbon removal strategies include familiar approaches like growing trees as well as more novel technologies like direct air capture, which scrubs CO2 from the air after which it can be sequestered underground.Carbon removal is different from carbon capture and storage (CCS), which captures emissions at the source — like from a power plant or a cement producer — and prevents those emissions from entering the atmosphere in the first place. Carbon capture is a form of emissions reduction rather than carbon removal.&nbsp;How Important Is Carbon Removal in the Fight Against Climate Change?The latest climate model scenarios show that in addition to substantial and rapid emissions reductions, large-scale carbon removal will be needed to keep temperature rise to 1.5 degrees C. The amount of carbon removal ultimately needed will depend on how quickly we reduce emissions in the near term as well as the magnitude and duration of any increase above 1.5 degrees C, known as overshoot. &nbsp;Estimates, including both natural and technological carbon removal approaches, range from 7 billion to 9 billion metric tons per year globally by 2050. For context, the United States emitted just over 6 billion metric tons of greenhouse gases in 2023. The faster the world reduces its emissions in the near term, the less it will have to rely on carbon removal. Conversely, as global emissions continue to rise, more carbon removal would be needed to meet global climate goals. &nbsp; While enhancing natural carbon removal through reforestation and forest management has long been of interest, efforts to develop and deploy novel technologies and approaches have ramped up more recently. In less than a decade, carbon removal has grown from a niche concept to a well-accepted component of climate portfolios and has received billions of dollars of government funding and private investment.This expansion was largely spurred by a 2018 report from the IPCC which concluded that hundreds of billions of tons of carbon removal will be needed by the end of the century to meet global climate goals. More recent IPCC reports from 2022 have reaffirmed this finding. The level of carbon removed today remains far below what we expect to need in the coming decades, indicating a need for investment in the public and private sectors to continue growing.As investment and deployment increases, it is important to make sure carbon removal is deployed responsibly. This includes making sure it complements, rather than replaces, emissions reduction, minimizes negative impacts on people and ideally provides benefits, and uses resources sustainably, among other factors.How Is CO2 Removed from the Atmosphere?Carbon removal can take numerous forms, from new technologies to land management practices. The big question is whether these approaches can deliver carbon removal at the pace and scale needed in the coming decades.Each carbon removal approach involves tradeoffs, including varying costs, resource needs (such as energy, land and water usage), benefits or negative impacts to people or the environment, and technology readiness, among others. Understanding the extent of these tradeoffs in different circumstances and investing in a portfolio of carbon removal approaches will be key to balancing them. &nbsp;Here are six options for removing carbon from the atmosphere:&nbsp;1) Trees and ForestsPlants remove carbon dioxide from the air naturally, and trees are especially good at storing CO2 removed from the atmosphere by photosynthesis. Expanding, restoring and managing tree cover to encourage more carbon uptake can leverage the power of photosynthesis, converting carbon dioxide in the air into carbon stored in wood and soils.&nbsp;Some management approaches that can increase carbon removal by trees and forests include:Reforestation, or restoring forest ecosystems after they’ve been damaged by wildfire or cleared for agricultural or commercial uses.Restocking, or increasing the density of forests where trees have been lost due to disease or disturbances.Silvopasture, or incorporating trees into animal agriculture systems.Cropland agroforestry, or incorporating trees into row crop agriculture systems.Urban reforestation, or increasing tree cover in urban areas.Earlier WRI research estimates that the theoretical carbon removal potential from forests and trees outside forests in the United States alone is more than half a gigatonne per year as of 2020, equivalent to all annual emissions from the U.S. agricultural sector. What’s more, approaches to remove CO2 through forests can be relatively inexpensive compared to other carbon removal options (generally less than $50 per metric ton of CO2) and yield cleaner water and air in the process.&nbsp; One major challenge is ensuring that forest expansion in one area doesn’t come at the expense of forests somewhere else. For example, taking farmland out of production would reduce the supply of food. This could necessitate converting other forests to farmland — resulting in more greenhouse gas emissions — unless improvements in farm productivity could fill the gap. Similarly, not harvesting timber from one forest may result in overharvesting in another. These dynamics make restoring and managing existing forests, and adding trees to ecologically appropriate lands outside of farmland, especially important.&nbsp;2) Biomass Carbon Removal and StorageBiomass carbon removal and storage (BiCRS) includes a range of processes that use biomass from plants or algae to remove carbon dioxide from the air and then store it for long periods of time. These methods aim to leverage the carbon storage capacity of plants beyond their natural lifecycles: Whereas trees remove and store carbon only until they die and decompose, biomass carbon removal and storage aims to sequester the CO2 that plants capture more permanently.&nbsp;There are many different methods for removing carbon using biomass. These include the creation of biochar, which is made by heating biomass in low-oxygen environments to produce a charcoal-like soil additive that sequesters carbon; bio-oil, which uses a similar process to produce a liquid that gets injected underground; and permanent storage of carbon-rich biomass in vaults. Bioenergy carbon capture and storage (BECCS) is another carbon removal pathway which involves generating energy using biomass and then capturing and sequestering the resulting CO2 emissions. One type of BECCS that features prominently in many economy-wide decarbonization scenarios is converting biomass to hydrogen, which could result in a carbon-negative fuel.&nbsp; While biomass carbon removal and storage can offer long-term CO2 removal, not all processes necessarily provide a net carbon benefit.For example, if crops are grown specifically to be used for biomass carbon removal, they could displace food production or natural ecosystems. This can cause cropland expansion and destruction of forests and grasslands, both of which release carbon and can erase the climate benefits of BiCRS while also exacerbating food insecurity and ecosystem loss. &nbsp;On the other hand, if BiCRS processes use biomass sources that don’t compete with food crops or ecosystems for land — such as algae or waste materials — they can provide net carbon removal. For example, many forestry and agricultural wastes, such as tree bark, nut hulls, and corn husks and stalks, are burned or left to decompose; using those materials instead for biomass carbon removal and storage can be beneficial from a climate perspective. Globally, the supply of biomass waste is likely lower than the potential demand to use it, especially as different sectors look to replace fossil fuels. WRI research shows that carbon removal may be a particularly valuable use of waste and residue biomass, rather than, say, electricity production, which can be more efficiently produced with renewable energy technologies like wind and solar.To fully harness the carbon removal potential of BiCRS pathways, policy and market incentives are needed to encourage the use of waste biomass and disincentivize the use of purpose-grown crops that could undermine the natural ability of forests and soils to sequester carbon.&nbsp; 3) Direct Air CaptureDirect air capture is the process of chemically scrubbing carbon dioxide from the ambient air and then sequestering it either underground or in long-lived products like concrete. This technology is similar to the carbon capture and storage technology used to reduce emissions from sources like power plants and industrial facilities. The difference is that direct air capture removes excess carbon that’s already been emitted into the atmosphere, instead of capturing it at the source.&nbsp; It is relatively straightforward to measure and account for the climate benefits of direct air capture, and its potential scale of deployment is enormous. However, the technology remains costly and energy-intensive today.Cost estimates for DAC with sequestration vary: voluntary purchases of carbon removal credits from direct air capture range from $100 to more than $2,000 per metric ton of CO2 depending on the technology, energy source, use of policy incentives, and other factors. The average cost is expected to come down as projects are built and technologies improve.Direct air capture also requires substantial heat and power inputs: Scrubbing 1 gigatonne of carbon dioxide from the air could require around 7% of current U.S. energy consumption (assuming each metric ton requires 2,000 kWh). To maximize net carbon removal, therefore, direct air capture technology needs to be powered by low- or zero-carbon energy sources.Investing in technological development and deployment experience, together with increasing availability of cheap, clean energy could advance prospects for direct air capture at a large scale.Direct air capture has seen a significant public and private investment in recent years, helping spur the more than 150 companies around the world as of early 2026. In the U.S., research and demonstration funding for DAC and other carbon removal approaches has grown significantly since 2019, though recent political changes have frozen or stalled grants for DAC provided in the 2021 Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. However, the 45Q tax credit that supports DAC was further expanded in the July 2025 reconciliation budget bill. The private sector is also supporting DAC development through individual and collective purchasing commitments for CDR, including DAC, which help spurs development by creating guaranteed demand.Interest in DAC is growing outside the U.S. as well, with projects in operation on five continents. Countries including Kenya, the UK, and Japan have DAC pilots and demonstration projects underway, and the largest operational DAC plant as of January 2026 is in Iceland. As projects move from the lab to demonstration, they are providing the experience and testing to optimize DAC technologies based on real-world conditions. &nbsp; Related Climate Companies Are Finding New Ways to Use Waste and Fight Climate Change Insights January 14, 2026 Climate 6 Things to Know About Direct Air Capture Insights September 2, 2025 Climate Ocean Carbon Removal Is Uncharted Territory. The US Can Help Change That Insights April 1, 2024 4) Carbon MineralizationSome minerals naturally react with CO2, turning carbon dioxide from a gas into a solid and keeping it out of the atmosphere permanently. This process is commonly referred to as “carbon mineralization” or “enhanced weathering,” and it naturally happens very slowly, over hundreds or thousands of years. &nbsp;But scientists are figuring out how to speed up the carbon mineralization process, especially by enhancing the exposure of these minerals to CO2 in the air or ocean. That could mean moving air through large deposits of mine tailings (rocks left over from mining operations) that contain the right mineral composition; crushing certain rocks or developing enzymes that chew up mineral deposits to increase their surface area; spreading certain types of ground rock on croplands or coastal areas where it reacts with and locks away carbon dioxide; and finding ways for certain industrial byproducts, like fly ash, kiln dust or iron and steel slag, that are reactive with CO2 to sequester it.&nbsp; Carbon mineralization can also be used to sequester carbon dioxide&nbsp;that’s already been captured by injecting that CO2 into suitable rock types where it reacts to form a solid carbonate, permanently storing it. Other applications could sequester carbon and replace more emissions-intensive conventional production methods — for example, by using mineralization as part of concrete production, which is used at a multi-billion-ton scale globally.Scientists have shown that carbon mineralization is possible and a handful of start-ups are already developing approaches, including mineralization-based building materials. However, there is more work to be done to map out cost-effective and prudent applications for scaled deployment and improve measurement of carbon sequestration.5) Marine Carbon Removal ApproachesA number of marine carbon removal approaches have been proposed to leverage the ocean’s capacity to sequester carbon and expand the portfolio of options beyond land-based applications. However, these approaches are at early stages of development and require more research and field testing to understand whether they are effective at removing carbon and what impacts they have on people and the environment. Expanding this knowledge base, combined with clarifying and improving governance (both in national and international waters) are critical to understanding which approaches are appropriate for investment. &nbsp;Each marine carbon removal approach aims to accelerate natural carbon cycles in the ocean. Potential approaches can be biotic and include leveraging photosynthesis in coastal plants, seaweed, or phytoplankton; or abiotic, such as adding certain minerals to seawater that react with dissolved CO2 and lock it away; or running an electric current through seawater to accelerate reactions that ultimately help extract CO2.&nbsp; Some marine carbon removal options could also provide co-benefits. For example, coastal blue carbon (carbon stored in mangroves, seagrasses, and salt marshes) and seaweed cultivation could remove carbon while also supporting ecosystem restoration, and adding minerals to help the ocean sequester carbon could reduce ocean acidification locally. However, much is still unknown about the broader ecological impacts of these approaches and further research is needed to better understand potential risks before these approaches are pursued at any scale.&nbsp;6) Farms and SoilsSoils naturally sequester carbon, but agricultural soils are running a big deficit due to frequent plowing and erosion from farming and grazing, all of which release stored carbon. Because agricultural land is so expansive — encompassing more than 4,800 million hectares around the world, or more than one-third of global land area — even small increases in soil carbon per acre could be impactful.There are many practices that can increase the amount of carbon stored in soils, although the amount and duration of the carbon sequestered depend on regional climate and soil type, among other factors.Planting cover crops when fields are otherwise bare can extend photosynthesis throughout the year; using compost can improve yields while storing the compost’s carbon content in the soil; and scientists are developing crops with deeper roots, making them more resistant to drought while depositing additional carbon into the soil. Many of the practices that increase soil carbon also improve soil health and can make agricultural systems more resilient to climate change. &nbsp; Increasing soil carbon can benefit farmers and ranchers in addition to removing carbon from the atmosphere. Photo by James Baltz/Unsplash Managing soil for carbon at a large scale, though, is a tricky proposition. Natural systems are inherently variable, and that makes it a real challenge to predict, measure and monitor the long-term carbon benefits of any given practice on a given acre. More research is needed to understand how these practices affect carbon sequestration in different soil types and different climates, and how long the carbon remains stored.The efficacy of some soil carbon sequestration practices — such as cover crops and grazing management — is also subject to continued scientific debate. Furthermore, changing conditions or management practices from year to year could erase prior gains. And because climate-smart farming practices would need to be adopted over large tracts of farmland to remove a significant amount of carbon, governments and market systems would need to incentivize landowners to implement these measures.&nbsp;The Future of Carbon RemovalRELATED RESOURCETechnological Carbon RemovalSystems Change LabLearn moreAnalysis by WRI has shown that the most cost-effective and lowest-risk strategy for increasing carbon removal capacity involves developing and deploying a variety of approaches in tandem.Moving forward, diverse methods of carbon dioxide removal must be built into climate change strategies around the world to avoid dangerous levels of global warming. The past few years have seen important steps in this direction, but more will be needed to realize national and global climate goals.Governments have a key role to play in scaling CDR as it is ultimately a public good of atmospheric clean-up; greater policy support is needed to drive both supply of and demand for carbon removal as well as development of robust governance frameworks to make sure carbon removal projects are developed and deployed responsibly. &nbsp;This piece was originally published in 2020. It was updated in March 2023 and February 2026 to reflect the latest data and information.Earlier versions of this article were authored by James Mulligan, Gretchen Ellison, Kelly Levin, Alex Rudee and Haley Leslie-Bole. &nbsp;&nbsp;

[Read original article](https://www.wri.org/insights/6-ways-remove-carbon-pollution-sky)
