---
layout: feed_item
title: "European, island states seek clear future for global roadmap to cut fossil fuels"
date: 2026-06-12 17:51:08 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['emissions', 'paris-agreement', 'climate-policy', 'year-2026', 'climate-summit', 'australia', 'cop28', 'fossil-fuels', 'oceania']
keywords: ['emissions', 'paris-agreement', 'climate-policy', 'island', 'states', 'climate-summit', 'european', 'year-2026']
description: "Any such push is likely to be resisted by nations whose economies are reliant on fossil fuel production"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/06/12/european-island-states-seek-clear-future-for-global-roadmap-to-cut-fossil-fuels/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

The global roadmap on transitioning away from fossil fuels now being developed should be a 'continuing conversation' which is part of UN climate talks, not just a one-off report, several governments told the Brazilian COP30 Presidency on Friday in Bonn. During a 90-minute exchange of views at the annual mid-year climate talks in Germany, several European governments and the Marshall Islands said the roadmap that Brazil is due to finish by November should be incorporated into the official negotiations. Any such push is likely to be resisted by nations whose economies are reliant on fossil fuel production. While Russia did not speak on Friday, it has said in earlier written submissions that the roadmap should not be referenced in any document approved by governments at UN climate talks. At COP30 last year, Brazil tried to get governments to agree to produce a roadmap on how to transition away from fossil fuels but the proposal did not win consensus, with major nations like Saudi Arabia and Russia opposed. Feedback in Bonn To save the day, Brazil's COP30 president André Aranha Corrêa do Lago promised at the closing plenary in Belem to draw up a voluntary roadmap in consultation with interested governments. Over 20 countries have officially submitted their opinions on this roadmap and, in Bonn on Friday, Corrêa do Lago sought their views – and those of civil society – in person after the presidency presented its findings so far. The roadmap will also incorporate outcomes from the first global conference on transitioning away from fossil fuels held in Santa Marta, Colombia, in April and attended by around 60 countries. A negotiator for the Marshall Islands told Friday's meeting that at COP31 this year all governments should 'welcome the collaborative effort behind the roadmap and the Santa Marta conference and for this work to be taken on to COP32 and beyond'. Jun 11, 2026 Politics Fewer journalists register for Bonn talks, as cuts to climate reporting bite UN data shows a smaller number have signed up to cover the mid-year climate negotiations in Germany than in any year since the COVID-19 pandemic Read more Jun 9, 2026 Politics COP31 leaders unveil global targets, with spotlight on electrification Co-hosts Türkiye and Australia want countries to sign on to global targets in three of their priority areas for this year's COP climate negotiations Read more A spokesperson for Switzerland said on behalf of a group of nations which includes South Korea and Mexico that the roadmap must be a 'sustained process, not a one-off report' and 'we would welcome an ongoing platform for dialogue, for learning and cooperation including among fossil-fuel production countries'. 'We expect more than a document, rather a process whereby we come together to develop concrete steps, recommendations and tools to prepare for the transitions,' she said, calling on the COP31 co-presidents Australia and Turkiye and COP32 host Ethiopia to 'take up the leadership' for implementing the roadmap'. Global stocktake response France's negotiator said the roadmap 'is a process and we will need continuing discussions' as 'implementation needs time', while the UK called for a 'continuing conversation, including as we head towards the second [global stocktake]'. The global stocktake (GST) is an official five-yearly report into how the world's governments are doing on their Paris Agreement goal to limit global warming to 1.5C above pre-industrial temperatures. The second stocktake will be published in 2028 and governments are likely to negotiate a response to it, which could include new commitments to reduce emissions, at COP33 that year. The response to the first global stocktake included the landmark COP28 commitment to transitioning away from fossil fuels in energy systems. Activists and Indigenous people take part in a Stop EACOP campaign protest against fossil fuels during the UN Climate Change Conference (COP30) in Belem, Brazil, November 13, 2025. REUTERS/Adriano Machado Activists and Indigenous people take part in a Stop EACOP campaign protest against fossil fuels during the UN Climate Change Conference (COP30) in Belem, Brazil, November 13, 2025. REUTERS/Adriano Machado 'Even though it's not a formal part of the negotiation agenda, the roadmap can be a key input for the entire information-gathering phase of the second GST,' Enrique Maurtua Konstantinidis, an independent climate policy consultant, explained to Climate Home News. 'The key is for countries not to focus the discussion on defending the roadmap itself, but rather on its content, which is what truly matters,' he added. At the Bonn event, civil society organisations also supported continuing the roadmap inside the formal climate process. Natalie Jones, policy adviser for the International Institute for Sustainable Development, told Climate Home News the roadmap should be 'an ongoing dialogue where countries can exchange their experiences, best practices and continue implementing the [transitioning away from fossil fuels] consensus'. Russian resistance But economies reliant on fossil fuel production are likely to oppose incorporating the roadmap into negotiations in Bonn and at COP summits. Russia's written submission to Brazil's consultation says the roadmap was not agreed by governments at COP30. It says such work should therefore take place on the margins of the UNFCCC process, adding that ' the inclusion of any references to the 'Roadmap' in the agenda or in official or informal documents' at Bonn or COP 'would constitute a deviation from previously agreed consensus outcomes'. Other major oil and gas producers like Saudi Arabia have not made written or spoken submissions and the US, as it has left the Paris Agreement, is not involved in discussions. But countries other than Russia are likely to resist incorporating the roadmap into official talks. The UN climate process needs ambition – the law demands it The submission by Japan, which is not a major producer of fossil fuels but consumes them from overseas, suggests nervousness about the roadmap. It asks Brazil for clarity on how the roadmap is 'envisaged to be utilised' and argues that as many countries continue to rely on fossil fuels for electricity, a full and fast shift to 'full decarbonisation' is 'challenging. After Friday's event, Corrêa do Lago told Climate Home News that 'the suggestions and the key milestones of the roadmap are not clear yet'. He added that the next step for the COP30 presidency will be to 'sit down in July and August to really prepare' the content. The veteran Brazilian diplomat added that the roadmap will have a section on the challenges of the transition and another section on solutions. National fossil fuel roadmaps Brazil, as COP30 president, is drawing up the global roadmap but its leader Lula da Silva has also ordered his officials to draw up a national roadmap. In April, France became the first and so far only nation to produce a roadmap, which amalgamated different existing energy and decarbonisation plans and targets. Colombia is reportedly drawing up a roadmap too, based on a draft document by academics. On Friday, a coalition of nearly 100 civil society organisations called on the COP31 co-presidents Australia and Türkiye to both come up with national roadmaps in order to 'lead by example'. Türkiye produces about a third of its electricity from coal, while Australia is the world's third-largest fossil fuel exporter, the NGOs said. But in the Brazil-led consultation meeting, a Norwegian negotiator downplayed the importance of separate national roadmaps for transitioning away from fossil fuels. While they can 'have a supporting role', the official said countries' nationally determined contributions (NDCs) 'must remain the primary vehicle for driving global climate transition.' NDCs are climate plans, usually containing emissions reduction targets, which the Paris Agreement states governments must update with higher ambition every five years. The post European, island states seek clear future for global roadmap to cut fossil fuels appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/06/12/european-island-states-seek-clear-future-for-global-roadmap-to-cut-fossil-fuels/)
