---
layout: feed_item
title: "Young South Africans take up sustainable agriculture for food security"
date: 2026-06-02 18:11:15 +0000
categories: [media]
tags: ['renewable-energy', 'drought', 'food-security', 'solar-power', 'climate-communication', 'media-coverage', 'urgent', 'public-health', 'agriculture', 'climate-health']
keywords: ['renewable-energy', 'young', 'drought', 'south', 'food-security', 'climate-communication', 'africans', 'solar-power']
description: "In a school in South Africa, a group of students stare at a row of small plants growing in a greenhouse"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/06/02/young-south-africans-take-up-sustainable-agriculture-for-food-security/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "media"
---

In a school in South Africa, a group of students stare at a row of small plants growing in a greenhouse. Each one is involved in the lesson, caring for the growing crops. But this is no ordinary classroom setting. These children are learning about aquaponics, a method of growing plants and fish in a mutually beneficial water system. This ancient technique of food production is now being taught to millions of schoolchildren after being introduced by the South African government seven years ago.Laerskool Kempton Park on the edge of Johannesburg was one of the first schools to introduce the subject with the aim of improving food security. This is a serious challenge in a country where an estimated 19.7 million people, or around 30% of the population, experience moderate levels of food insecurity, meaning that they struggle to afford enough food for a healthy, balanced diet. Bringing the farm to school Aquaponics is a way of supporting communities to access food in a sustainable and efficient way. The solution is simple: fish waste is turned into available nutrients by bacteria in the water. Plants absorb these nutrients and the cleaned water is returned to the fish tank. There are multiple benefits to this approach. The system doesn't require chemical fertilisers, soil or large tracts of land. It is also highly efficient, with recirculated water being used over and over again. This is an important feature in areas of South Africa that experience drought or unpredictable weather. Agricultural subsidies can be repurposed for a just and sustainable rural transition Aquaponics can offer a range of benefits depending on the local context. In South Africa, townships in major cities such as Johannesburg don't always have the space to produce their own food, while in other places, such as the Northern Cape, extreme weather is making agriculture much harder. Learners participating in a practical aquaponics lesson in Kempton Park. Image: INMED Learners participating in a practical aquaponics lesson in Kempton Park. Image: INMED Schoolchildren observing fish grown in an aquaponics system. Image: INMED Schoolchildren observing fish grown in an aquaponics system. Image: INMED At Laerskool Kempton Park, the students have benefited from the innovative work of INMED, a non-profit organisation that supports vulnerable children and families in the country. INMED has trained hundreds of teachers and over 7,000 children on the benefits of aquaponics. With the help of funding from the Adaptation Fund through the UNDP-Adaptation Fund Climate Innovation Accelerator (AFCIA), the organisation was able to develop its own aquaponics system to be used in schools. Scaling up the solution INMED describes its prototype as a 'plug and play' system, designed to be modular and easy to install and manage. The system includes a 2,000-litre fish tank powered by a solar pump to circulate water. The design is simple with a view that it could be easily replicated across different school settings. Unathi Sihlahla, director at INMED South Africa, told Climate Home News that 'aquaponics speaks to a number of challenges… including limited access to nutritious food, high youth unemployment, water scarcity, and in many cases, poor or no access to arable land.' Giving nature breathing room builds climate resilience INMED's prototype allows communities to work around these problems as it doesn't need soil and uses far less water than conventional agriculture. 'We've seen schools that previously had no food production now able to grow vegetables consistently, while also producing fish. That food often goes straight into school meals or supports vulnerable households nearby,' Sihlahla added. The project estimates that over 5,300 kilogrammes of food have been harvested in each quarter the system has been operating. As aquaponics is now part of the school curriculum, many educational departments across South Africa have been looking at ways to teach the subject. INMED's innovative design could provide a handy solution. The organisation has already started to roll it out across different provinces and a new collaboration with the Eastern Cape Provincial Department of Education is in the works. INMED is also scaling the 'plug and play' model in Tanzania. Plant inspection at one of INMED's 'plug and play' aquaponics prototypes. Image: INMED Plant inspection at one of INMED's 'plug and play' aquaponics prototypes. Image: INMED Giving youth a sense of pride For educators, teaching schoolchildren new agricultural skills is not only about improving food security, but also about creating the next generation of farmers. This group will need to grow food with the increased threat of extreme weather events and having knowledge of alternative methods, such as aquaponics, could be key. 'Agriculture is not seen as something young people want to go into, but when they are exposed to something like aquaponics, it feels modern and relevant,' said Sihlahla, adding that some students have started their own projects at home or are looking to continue studying the method. 'There's also a sense of pride. Producing food that supports your school or community changes how young people see themselves and their role.' Engaging the next generation The Adaptation Fund's support for young people extends beyond South Africa. Several other related projects aim to equip youth with practical skills for climate adaptation. In Costa Rica, a $10-million project implemented by private foundation Fundecooperación included several creative youth-focused programmes in climate-vulnerable areas. It trained young people in coral reef restoration and farming techniques, involved high school students in community water resource monitoring and management, shared knowledge on adaptation through a theatre tour in schools, and created an art mural competition using AI. Extreme heat is rewriting food security. The best fixes are already within reach In Lesotho, meanwhile, climate education is being integrated into the school curriculum through climate-smart agriculture materials and teacher training rolled out across primary and secondary schools. This is equipping students from an early age with practical, locally relevant knowledge to build resilience. 'Children and young people are among the most vulnerable to climate change,' said Mikko Ollikainen, head of the Adaptation Fund. 'These programmes are not only training young people in adaptation but empowering them.' Adam Wentworth is a freelance writer based in Brighton, UK. The post Young South Africans take up sustainable agriculture for food security appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/06/02/young-south-africans-take-up-sustainable-agriculture-for-food-security/)
