---
layout: feed_item
title: "Somalia: Radio Ergo Weekly Feedback Report, Issued: 10 Apr 2026"
date: 2026-04-10 07:58:12 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['year-2026', 'water-crisis', 'agriculture', 'wind-power', 'drought', 'renewable-energy', 'food-security']
keywords: ['year-2026', 'radio', 'water-crisis', 'somalia', 'drought', 'wind-power', 'agriculture', 'ergo']
description: "Country: Somalia Source: Radio Ergo Please refer to the attached file"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/radio-ergo-weekly-feedback-report-issued-10-apr-2026
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: Somalia Source: Radio Ergo Please refer to the attached file. Brief Analysis Callers to Radio Ergo's independent audience feedback platform this week (2-8 April 2026) presented an overall mixed picture with regard to weather patterns across the country. A number of callers across parts of Somaliland, parts of Galgadud region, and a few southern areas spoke about rainfall, sometimes heavy and sometimes more sporadic, that raised their hopes of recovery. At the same time, a bigger number of callers spoke about continuing drought causing food and water shortages, livestock losses, and general hardship for communities. These calls came from parts of Somaliland, many locations across Galgadud, Hiran region, and a few from Bay and the Shabelles. Farmers from parts of Galgadud complained of lack of water and challenges in irrigating crops adequately. Others including in Middle Shabelle were plagued by crop pests. Livestock callers described diseases affecting goats, camels, cows, and sheep. Female callers this week spoke mostly about rainfall or the persistence of drought and its impact on their lives. They also spoke about nutrition, livestock diseases, conflict, and the need for aid. The following summarises the calls by theme. Agriculture – several farmers in Guriel complained that they didn't have enough water to irrigate adequately their crops of maize, tomatoes, and vegetables. One said they hadn't had any rainfall and that the dry soil soaked up all the irrigation. Among those mentioning pest damage, a farmer in Middle Shabelle described black spots on the crop leaves, and asked for the farming programme experts to advise on what to do. Livestock – female callers in Erigabo and Guriel wanted help with persistent ticks that were making their animals sick. Callers in central regions said their camels were sick with diarrhoea; another thought his pregnant camel had measles. Many spoke of symptoms including diarrhoea, coughing, and runny noses among their goats and sheep. Radio Ergo's weekly vet programme responds to listeners' livestock problems. Nutrition – a caller in Banadir said she was malnourished and breastfeeding her twins. She wanted to know how she could get help. Another wanted more explanation of the possible symptoms caused by malnutrition. A caller in Bardera wanted help for his malnourished son. Rainfall – in Somaliland, a caller in Berbera said the rain had begun, and another in Hargeisa said the downpours were heavy there. Some in parts of Sanag mentioned rainfall. One caller said they had had some rainfall accompanied by strong winds and that some of their goats had died as a result. Callers in several locations across Galgadud region said they had received rainfall and hoped for recovery, although some noted that there were areas that had not yet received the rain. A caller in Eji, Middle Shabelle, said the rainfall had arrived there after a long wait. Two callers in Bay region and one in Bardera, Gedo also reported rainfall. Drought and impact – a female caller in Togdher region said they were facing food and water shortage following prolonged drought, and she didn't have food for her children. She said they needed aid to reach them. Another female caller in Goof, Erigabo, said the drought conditions had led to fodder and water shortages, and they were appealing for aid. A caller in another village in Erigabo, Sanag, said they needed water aid as their livestock were struggling due to the drought and water shortage. Most callers this week on the drought theme came from parts of Galgadud region. Callers in Abudwak, Balanbal, and Saldigha stated that their livestock were continuing to die off. Other affected areas where some appealed for help were Adado, Dusamareb, Guriel, Gelinsor, and Qurdubale. There were also many callers from Beletweyne in Hiran. A female caller said they hadn't had any rainfall and they were vulnerable and in need of help. Other callers said the only available water was bitter and expensive; and that following a little rainfall in the region some days ago they were now back to drought. A caller in Adale, Middle Shabelle, said people needed humanitarian aid. A caller in Bay region said the drought was widespread. Callers in Kuntawarey and Bula-marer said they were grappling with drought and hoping for relief. Conflict – callers noted that conflict was disturbing their lives. A female caller in Gudurwa, west of Adado, said the area was insecure due to clan conflict in which their houses had been burned and property stolen. They also faced the drought. A caller in Armale, Sanag region, said they had rainfall but were worried by small conflicts and hoped for protection.

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/radio-ergo-weekly-feedback-report-issued-10-apr-2026)
