---
layout: feed_item
title: "World: GEOGLAM Global Crop Monitor | No. 43 – May 2026"
date: 2026-05-28 09:54:04 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['australia', 'drought', 'weather-patterns', 'oceania', 'water-crisis', 'urgent', 'el-nino', 'year-2026', 'flooding', 'extreme-weather']
keywords: ['global', 'world', 'australia', 'drought', 'oceania', 'geoglam', 'water-crisis', 'weather-patterns']
description: "Country: World Source: GEOGLAM Crop Monitor Please refer to the attached file"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/world/geoglam-global-crop-monitor-no-43-may-2026
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: World Source: GEOGLAM Crop Monitor Please refer to the attached file. Global Crop Overview Global crop conditions at the end of April remain generally positive for wheat, maize, rice, and soybeans. For wheat, conditions are overall favourable, albeit with some areas of dryness in Europe, the Middle East, and the US. For maize, global conditions are generally favourable; however, areas of dryness persist in parts of Sub-Saharan Africa and are developing in the southeast US. For rice, overall conditions are favourable; however, there are some flooding concerns in northeastern Bangladesh. For soybeans, conditions are favourable in the Southern Hemisphere, with harvesting continuing as sowing begins in the Northern Hemisphere. The remaining crops are detailed in the CM4EW publication. Global Climate Influences Overview Neutral ENSO conditions are present. El Niño conditions are confidently forecast from mid-2026 to early 2027. El Niño conditions may develop soon—during May to July 2026 (61 percent chance)—and could become a moderate or strong event. According to the April 2026 NOAA CPC ENSO outlook, there is an 87 to 92 percent chance of El Niño conditions from July 2026 to January 2027. The likelihood of extreme conditions during the coming year will increase as El Niño warms global temperatures. For further details on the Global Climate Influences and Regional Climate Outlooks section. WHEAT In North America, drought in the US continues to expand across winter wheat areas. Spring wheat sowing picks up pace. In Canada, conditions have improved for winter wheat owing to recent above-average precipitation in Ontario and Quebec. In Mexico, the autumn-winter season crop is under favourable conditions. In Europe, winter wheat is under generally favourable conditions; however, additional rainfall is needed in central and eastern Europe to avoid rapid deterioration in crop conditions before entering the reproductive stages. In the UK, conditions are favourable. In Türkiye, conditions remain favourable for winter wheat. In Ukraine, winter wheat is under favourable conditions despite frequent and prolonged frosts in April. In the Russian Federation, winter wheat is under favourable conditions. Spring wheat sowing is ongoing, albeit slowed by recent cold and wet weather. In Central Asia, winter wheat continues to develop in Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, and Afghanistan under favourable conditions. In Kazakhstan, winter wheat conditions are favourable. Sowing of spring wheat is now underway across southern Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Afghanistan under favourable conditions. In South Asia, the harvest is wrapping up in India under favourable conditions despite some localized damage from late-season rainfall and hail. In Pakistan, harvesting is progressing under favourable conditions. In Bangladesh, harvesting is wrapping up. In Nepal, harvesting is ongoing. In East Asia, winter wheat in China develops under favourable conditions as spring wheat sowing continues. In Mongolia, spring wheat sowing is underway. In MENA, winter wheat continues to develop across Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, Egypt, Lebanon, Syria, Iraq, and Iran, and harvesting is just beginning in some areas. However, early-season dry conditions continue to negatively affect crop performance in northwestern Libya and parts of central Iran. Flooding at the end of March also impacted parts of Syria, Iraq, and Iran, though the overall impact on crops is expected to be minimal. In Sub-Saharan Africa, winter wheat harvesting in Sudan is wrapping up with below-average yields expected due to ongoing conflict. In Tanzania, conditions are favourable for winter wheat with harvest beginning in May. In Lesotho, South Africa, and Zimbabwe, sowing of winter wheat is beginning under favourable conditions. In Oceania, sowing is just beginning in Australia. In South America, sowing is beginning in Uruguay. MAIZE In South America, the harvest in Brazil of the spring-planted crop (smaller season) is progressing under mostly exceptional conditions. The summer-planted crop (larger season) is in mostly favourable conditions; however, a lack of rainfall and high temperatures is negatively impacting crops in the Southeast region. In Argentina, the harvest of early-planted crops (larger season) slows as priority shifts to the soybean harvest. The late-planted crop (smaller season) continues through the grain-filling stage under favorable conditions. In Uruguay, the harvest for the late-planted crop is wrapping up. In Central America & the Caribbean, conditions are favourable in Mexico for the autumn-winter season (smaller season). In Cuba, harvesting of second-season maize is wrapping up with below-average yields. In Haiti, the Printemps season is under favourable conditions. In Guatemala, sowing is beginning for the Primera season of maize. In North America, sowing is progressing in the US, with an expected reduction in total sown area compared to last year. In Europe, sowing in the EU is ongoing under favorable conditions. In Ukraine, sowing is beginning. In the Russian Federation, sowing is beginning. In South Asia, the harvest of the Rabi crop (smaller season) in India is wrapping up under favorable conditions. In Sri Lanka, sowing of the Yala season maize is just beginning. In Bangladesh, the harvest for the Rabi/winter crop is wrapping up. In Nepal, sowing of the main season maize progresses. In East Asia, sowing of spring-maize in China is continuing throughout the country. In Southeast Asia, the harvest in Indonesia of the wet-season crop continues as sowing of the dry-season crop begins. In Malaysia, conditions are favourable. Dry-season maize harvesting is wrapping up in Cambodia as it progresses in Laos, Myanmar, the Philippines, and Thailand. In East Africa, Belg crops are favourable in Ethiopia. In South Sudan, sowing is ongoing. In Uganda, Kenya (long rains), Somalia (Gu season), Rwanda, Burundi, and the United Republic of Tanzania, sowing and development of the main season maize is underway. Recent drier than average conditions are causing concern in Rwanda, Burundi, and the central and western bimodal areas of Uganda. In West Africa, sowing of main season maize is underway along the Gulf of Guinea, including in Liberia, Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Togo, Benin, Nigeria, Cameroon, and the Central African Republic. In Southern Africa, harvesting is ongoing in Angola, Namibia, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Zambia, Malawi, Mozambique, Madagascar, Lesotho, and eSwatini. Yield concerns remain in Angola, Madagascar, Mozambique, and Zimbabwe. In South Africa, harvest is progressing under mostly favourable to exceptional conditions.

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/world/geoglam-global-crop-monitor-no-43-may-2026)
