---
layout: feed_item
title: "EU Assistance to Ukraine (in U.S. Dollars) (22 Apr 2026)"
date: 2026-04-23 02:48:21 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['fossil-fuels', 'climate-costs', 'economic-impacts', 'public-health', 'emissions', 'year-2026', 'urgent', 'climate-health']
keywords: ['fossil-fuels', 'economic-impacts', 'climate-costs', 'dollars', 'public-health', 'emissions', 'assistance', 'ukraine']
description: "Country: Ukraine Source: European Union The European Union (EU) and our 27 Member States remain united and determined in our unprecedented support for Ukraine"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/ukraine/eu-assistance-ukraine-us-dollars-22-apr-2026
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: Ukraine Source: European Union The European Union (EU) and our 27 Member States remain united and determined in our unprecedented support for Ukraine. Since the start of the war, the EU and our Member States have made available over $223 billion1 in financial, military, humanitarian, and refugee assistance, of which 65% have been provided as grants or in-kind support and 35% in the form of highly concessional loans. The EU is Ukraine's largest supporter. In February 2024, European leaders agreed to commit up to $54 billion until 2027 for the Ukraine Facility to support Ukraine's recovery, reconstruction and modernization, as well as its reform efforts as part of its EU accession path. In October 2024, the EU and G7 partners agreed to collectively provide loans of $50 billion to support Ukraine's budgetary, military and reconstruction needs, financed by extraordinary revenues from immobilized Russian sovereign assets. The EU will contribute up to $20 billion, the first $10 billion of which was disbursed in 2025. In April 2025, the EU made available $2.3 billion generated from the proceeds of immobilized Russian assets, $4.04 billion in total, $3.5 billion for military support via EPF and $400 million through the Ukraine Facility. In December 2023, European leaders endorsed opening accession negotiations with Ukraine. Ukraine has shown remarkable determination and progress on reforms, including anti-corruption, while defending its country and its people against Russia's aggression. Ukraine is already a member of the European family and we will continue supporting Ukraine every step of the way on its path to EU membership. Since the start of Russia's illegal war, we have worked in lockstep with the United States and other partners to impose massive, unprecedented sanctions on Russia, its military, and its economy, as well as to isolate Russia internationally, despite their negative effects on Europe's economy. The EU moved at lightning speed to diversify energy supplies and decouple from Russian fossil fuels,banning Russian coal and oil imports and drastically reducing gas imports.The U.S. commitment to support Europe in substituting U.S. LNG replacing most imported Russian gas has been instrumental. Collective EU and Member State support to Ukraine includes: Over $122 billion in financial and budgetary support and in humanitarian and emergency assistance. This allows Ukraine to keep paying wages and pensions and maintain essential public services, such as hospitals, schools, and housing for relocated people. It ensures macroeconomic stability, and helps restore critical infrastructure. It includes: $50 billion of financial assistancein 2022-2025 $34 billion of financial assistance mobilized from the Ukraine Facility $16 billion of financial assistance directly from EU Member States in grants, loans, and guarantees $3 billion in loans from the EIB and EBRD guaranteed by the EU budget $4.8 billion in humanitarian aid, emergency assistance, budget support and crisis response, including $122 million to rebuild Ukrainian schools Over 157,000 tonnes of in-kind assistance, including medical supplies, mobile hospitals, shelters, school buses, ambulances, and power generators, with an estimated value of over $1 billion, have been provided via the EU Civil Protection Mechanism by 35 participating countries, coordinated by the EU. 4,986 EU-coordinated medical evacuations of Ukrainian patients to hospitals across Europe. ENERGY SUPPORT: Since 2022, the EU has donated $2.3 billion for energy security, primarily via the Ukraine Energy Support Fund and the Union Civil Protection Mechanism (UCPM) and signed a guarantee for $577 million for gas reserves. An additional $46 million was provided for winter preparedness 2025/2026, and a Combined Heat and Power Plant was sent to Ukraine. Also, nearly 11,6000 power generators have been donated so far to Ukraine by the European Commission and EU Member States/UCPM Participating States, to restore power to hospitals, shelters and critical services in Ukraine. MILITARY SUPPORT: The EU and its Member States have provided $82.9 billion in military support to Ukraine since 2022. As pa[rt of this support, the High Representative worked with Member States to provide two million rounds of large-caliber ammunition. In addition, the EU has mobilized $4.04 billion from the proceeds of Russian immobilized assets comprising three lines of effort: $2.2 billion for the joint procurement and delivery of up to an additional one million rounds of artillery ammunition and an additional $535 million to boost EU defense industry capacities in ammunition production. On top of that, in March 2024, the Council established a dedicated Ukraine Assistance Fund worth $5.4 billion. The EU is today the largest military training provider to the Ukrainian armed forces – over 86,800 Ukrainian soldiers in 2,013 training modules, trained under the EU's $390 million Military Assistance Mission. An additional $80 million has been provided for humanitarian de-mining of liberated territories. HUMANITARIAN SUPPORT: Up to $18 billion from the EU budget to support Ukrainian refugees who have fled to EU Member States since February 2022. Close to 8 million refugees have been recorded in the EU, mainly women, children, and older persons, and more than 4 million Ukrainians have registered for temporary protection in the EU, which means they are entitled to work, accommodation, healthcare, as well as schooling for their children2. FOOD SECURITY: Over $2.2 billion to boost 'EU Solidarity Lanes' to transport Ukrainian food to the world and address the food security crisis caused by Russia's war. These lanes have already helped Ukraine export over 199 million tonnes of goods, including 88 million tonnes of grains and related products, and generated much-needed revenue for Ukraine's economy. By bringing war back to Europe, Putin plans not only to destroy Ukraine and destabilize Europe, but to tear up international law and the UN Charter and undermine peace and security in the entire world, with dire consequences for vital American and European global security interests. We are grateful to the United States for its unwavering bipartisan support to Ukraine, and for standing with the European Union as we jointly work to ensure Ukraine's victory in its ongoing fight for survival as an independent country and a sovereign nation. This is not the moment to weaken our support to Ukraine. Ukraine can only defeat Putin's aggression if it stands firmly on two legs of American and European support. Standing together against Putin's brutality will be even more crucial in the months to come as we continue to address Ukraine's needs and hold Russia accountable for its criminal actions. 1EUR values converted into USD at the 12-month average ECB reference exchange rate as of 12 November 2025. The total figure includes $34.4 billion already mobilized under the Ukraine Facility and $10 billion already disbursed as part of the G7 loan. 2The Kiel Institute estimates national expenditure by EU member states in support of Ukrainian refugees at approximately $170 billion.

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/ukraine/eu-assistance-ukraine-us-dollars-22-apr-2026)
