---
layout: feed_item
title: "How MSF teams are 'greening' operations around the world"
date: 2026-06-05 15:03:08 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['tropical-storms', 'solar-power', 'year-2026', 'renewable-energy', 'urgent', 'extreme-weather', 'public-health', 'climate-health', 'flooding', 'cyclone']
keywords: ['tropical-storms', 'solar-power', 'year-2026', 'teams', 'renewable-energy', 'urgent', 'operations', 'greening']
description: "Country: World Source: Médecins Sans Frontières How MSF teams are 'greening' operations around the worldLearn about the solutions and initiatives MSF is unde..."
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/world/how-msf-teams-are-greening-operations-around-world
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: World Source: Médecins Sans Frontières How MSF teams are 'greening' operations around the worldLearn about the solutions and initiatives MSF is undertaking to help reduce emissions and pollutive practices in our projects. Leila Rafei June 4 2026, 4:41pm This will not only be good for the environment but will also strengthen the resilience of our activities and improve the continuity and quality of our medical programs. To help meet this goal, MSF teams have been implementing a wide variety of solutions and initiatives to reduce emissions and pollutive practices over the last three years. It is possible to change ways of working for the better, even in remote humanitarian settings. Here's how. Why does MSF need to be greened? As health care providers, MSF responds to the health impacts of climate change, such as malnutrition, malaria, and dengue. But we are also responsible for contributing to the problem: Our activities generate carbon emissions, which cause global heating, pollute the air and water sources, and impact the availability of water in areas where it is already scarce. How medical activities impact the environment Using energy to run health facilities Transporting medical supplies and staff Buying medicines and hospital equipment Generating medical waste Extracting water The environmental impacts, in turn, bring consequences for people's health. For example, more frequent and intense extreme weather events like floods and cyclones can contribute to the spread of diseases like malaria and dengue, while difficulties producing food in a more hostile climate can increase malnutrition. As health professionals, we have an ethical obligation to 'do no harm' to people and the planet. That's why MSF has committed to taking action to reduce our environmental footprint. What does it take to green an organization like MSF? Greening our organization presents many challenges. Most of our medical activities take place in places that are remote or affected by conflict, and where electricity and safe waste disposal are not always available. Given the size and nature of our organization, it will take time and effort to change the way we deliver health care across the world. This is a long journey, but we remain committed to becoming more environmentally sustainable. We've started by measuring our carbon footprint to understand where we need to put most of our efforts. We also identified a roadmap with concrete actions targeting key emitting areas. Teams have now started implementing these solutions and activities across our projects in different locations. What has MSF done so far? The solutions and initiatives MSF teams have taken on to reduce emissions and pollutive practices are starting to show positive impacts. 1. Solar and energy efficiency in health facilities As of January 2026, we have installed more than 92 solar power systems across our projects, saving approximately 132,000 gallons of fuel each year. This allows for more autonomous and sustainable health facilities, as we don't have to rely on unstable electricity. That means it's also better for patient care. Many projects have also installed solar appliance systems, including 26 solar water pumps, 71 solar water heaters, and 53 solar air conditioners. We are also insulating our pharmacies and warehouses to reduce the amount of energy needed to run them, and we are replacing the air conditioners in our health facilities with new types that consume up to 65 percent less energy. 2. Responsible waste management We rely on a variety of equipment to run our medical activities around the world. All of this creates waste. Much of this waste is made of plastics, such as tents and single-use medical items like gloves, masks, vaccination kits, and packaging for medicines. In many places where we work, it is difficult to properly recycle or dispose of such materials. To tackle this problem, MSF aims to create less waste in the first place. We aim to reduce consumption when possible and opt for reusable, sustainably produced, and minimally packaged medical items. We are also working to ensure the responsible disposal of the waste we generate. This means putting in place good waste management practices, even in emergency settings. At the end of 2025, nearly half of our projects had established waste management plans. 3. Cutting down on single-use items and plastics Health care systems worldwide rely heavily on single use items, and so do we. Most medical items we use in our projects — 66 percent — are single use. That's why we're aiming to reduce our reliance on such items and find alternative products when possible, including for face masks and examination gloves. Many of these items are also made of plastics, which is harmful to patients and the environment. We are evaluating the more than 4,000 single-use items in our catalog to identify what we can change now and determine whether we can ask manufacturers to change what they produce. We are also looking into other solutions that are better for both the environment and our patients. For example, preventing the over-prescription of medications — so that patients only receive the medicines they need — can help reduce emissions and generate less waste. This also helps counter antimicrobial resistance. 4. Sustainable transport MSF aims to drive less during our daily operations. This involves reducing the number of journeys in transit, and using vehicles that are less harmful to the environment, including through servicing to reduce their consumption of oil and fuel. We are also training our drivers on energy efficiency: By the end of 2025, drivers in more than half of our projects had received training. In addition, MSF teams are working to reduce unnecessary air shipments of supplies by managing stocks and shipping in bulk by boat instead. We speak out. Get updates.

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/world/how-msf-teams-are-greening-operations-around-world)
