---
layout: feed_item
title: "Wild blueberry farms across Maine suffer as climate change upends growing seasons"
date: 2026-05-16 13:00:00 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['drought', 'california', 'climate-health', 'insurance', 'food-security', 'public-health', 'usa', 'renewable-energy', 'wind-power', 'agriculture']
keywords: ['drought', 'california', 'climate-health', 'insurance', 'wild', 'food-security', 'farms', 'blueberry']
description: "Last summer, the wild blueberry fields at Crystal Spring Farm turned red too soon"
external_url: https://grist.org/food-and-agriculture/wild-blueberry-farms-across-maine-suffer-as-climate-change-upends-growing-seasons/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Grist"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Last summer, the wild blueberry fields at Crystal Spring Farm turned red too soon. Severe drought had gripped most of the state of Maine. At his farm near the town of Brunswick, Seth Kroeck knew the leaves were changing color prematurely because the blueberry plants were stressed. Berries shriveled before they could ripen. The farm's 2025 harvest was almost a total loss. 'We got about 7 percent of our expected harvest,' Kroeck, 55, said. Standing in his blueberry fields in April, he pointed out the new growth, still only a few inches high, and commented that last year's yield was 'a lot of raking with not a lot to show for it.' This was just the latest in a series of devastating weather for Crystal Spring Farm's 72 acres of wild blueberries. 'In the last seven years, we've lost the crop three times, almost completely,' he said. As the climate changes, these losses are getting more common for wild blueberry farmers. And, experts say, the solutions are pricey. Maine's quintessential fruit Wild blueberries are an iconic food in Maine, like lobster rolls or whoopie pies. But they aren't the same as the fruits sold by the pint in a grocery store. Wild blueberries are smaller and have a stronger flavor than their cultivated counterparts. They're typically packed and frozen rather than sold fresh. Wild blueberry bushes grow on sandy and gravelly soil in Maine, which can be difficult to irrigate. Sydney Cromwell / Inside Climate News Maine's farms contribute almost the entirety of the United States' commercially sold wild blueberries. The industry harvested nearly 88 million pounds of fruit in 2023, bringing $361 million in revenue to the state, according to the Wild Blueberry Commission of Maine. 'It's really something that's a backbone industry to the state and a part of the state's character,' Kroeck said. A father of two, Kroeck grew up in St. Louis, Missouri, and said gardening with a friend 'spiraled' into an agricultural career. In college, he studied printmaking — a degree that he jokes is useful every day on the farm. One of the few native North American fruits, wild blueberry patches have often existed in the same spot for longer than the farms that now harvest them. 'The blueberry plants have been there for millennia, and they have been cared for by generations of farmers before me, and then the Indigenous community [before that],' said Kroeck, who also grows row crops and pasturage. An individual bush only produces fruit every other year, so farmers typically harvest about half their acreage in any given year. Also called 'lowbush' blueberries, the plants grow in dense mats on sandy, gravelly, or otherwise low-nutrient soil, primarily in eastern Canada and New England. 'Blueberry soil is not nutrient-rich. Nothing else wants to grow there … but wild blueberries love it,' said Rachel Schattman, a professor of sustainable agriculture and leader of the Agroecology Lab at the University of Maine. Wild blueberries are smaller and have a stronger flavor compared to cultivated blueberries. Courtesy of Rachel Schattman Schattman, 43, started working on vegetable and dairy farms in high school and continued farm work through the completion of her master's degree. She owned a commercial vegetable farm for 10 years while pursuing her interest in agricultural research and earning a doctorate at the University of Vermont. Schattman said the financial challenges of running a small farm eventually led her to pursue research full time. She worked for the USDA on climate change's interactions with agriculture before moving to Maine in 2020, where she met the wild blueberry for the first time. 'It holds a really special place in the culture of Maine,' she said. Each patch has a variety of genetics rather than a monoculture. You can see — and taste — the plant's diversity once it begins producing berries, Kroeck said. 'If you were to fly over our blueberry field while they're fruiting, you'd see a lot of subtly different shades of blue and black,' he said. Despite their crop's hardy nature, wild blueberry farms are struggling to deal with recent extremes of temperature and precipitation. It's got the entire industry worried. 'It would be a real cultural loss to have fewer wild blueberry farms and fewer berries available in the future,' said Lily Calderwood, a wild blueberry specialist at the University of Maine Cooperative Extension whose research focuses on disease and pest management. She grew up surrounded by agriculture in Massachusetts and became fascinated with it on a trip to a Cape Cod cranberry bog as an undergraduate student. Calderwood, 39, worked at the nonprofit Earthwatch Institute, then earned her doctorate at the University of Vermont and later worked at the Cornell Cooperative Extension before coming to Maine eight years ago. Stressed seasons Maine's wild blueberry populations are caught in a climate hotspot, driven partially by rapid warming in the Gulf of Maine, Schattman said. According to 2021 research, the state's blueberry barrens are warming faster than the rest of the state, especially in locations closer to the coast. In response, the berries are ripening sooner, and farmers can miss part of their harvest if they're caught unaware. Calderwood said the crop was traditionally harvested in early or mid-August, but now most fruits are ready by late July. High heat also makes the harvest window shorter, she said, meaning farmers need additional labor and equipment to finish in time. Scientists at the Wyman's Research Center in Maine study the effect of rising heat and changing rainfall on wild blueberries, one of the state's signature crops. Courtesy of Rachel Schattman Kroeck said he was unprepared for the early ripening in some years, and harvesting late meant lower yields and worse fruit quality. 'As farmers, we're very much attached to the season, and you kind of get into your ideas of when things need to be done,' he said. Now, he has to spend more time observing conditions directly in the fields. Farmers can't rely on traditional knowledge — some of it passed down through families of growers — to plan their schedules anymore, Calderwood said. The farmers she works with have 'absolutely no doubt' that climate change is already affecting their livelihoods. Kroeck worked on farms in California, Massachusetts, and New York before he and his wife, a Massachusetts native, decided they liked the Maine farming community and moved to Crystal Spring Farm 22 years ago. In the last decade, he said, the unpredictable weather has far exceeded the typical year-to-year variation he was used to. 'If you look at the research, it's pretty hard to deny that we're living in a period of changing weather,' he said. Scientists at the Wyman's Research Center in Maine study the effect of rising heat and changing rainfall on wild blueberries, one of the state's signature crops. Courtesy of Rachel Schattman Kroeck serves on the boards of the Organic Farmers Association and the Maine Organic Farmers and Gardeners Association, both organizations that address climate change's impact on agriculture. Maine experienced severe droughts in 2020, 2022, and 2025, plus one of its wettest years on record in 2023. Too-wet conditions encourage disease and unchecked weeds in blueberry fields. Droughts, on the other hand, reduce the number of flowers that form and shrivel the fruit. Farms also contend with surprise frosts in late spring, which can kill flower buds right as they start to form, Kroeck said. Occasionally, warm autumns have caused the bushes to flower again just before winter, sapping energy and reducing their berry production the following year. Wild blueberries are dependent on steady levels of moisture throughout the growing season, Calderwood said. That's getting less and less common. 'The plant needs more water to keep the berries on the stems. And with less water and higher temperatures, they will shrivel and drop to the ground before a farmer can get to them,' Calderwood said. And since wild blueberries only fruit every other year, Kroeck said extreme weather can have effects on multiple seasons. 'A drought year is obviously going to affect the size of our fruit, but it's also going to affect that other half that's still in the vegetation state,' he said. 'If they're stressed from water and from temperature, they're not going to grow as robust as they would, and the fruit they put out is not going to be as big as it could.' A cycle of loss Last year, Maine saw a wet spring followed by hot, dry conditions that started in June. The drought intensified in August and lasted through the rest of the year and into 2026. Calderwood called it 'a classic example of climate whiplash.' The Maine Wild Blueberry Commission estimates the industry lost $30 million in 2025. 'It was devastating for many farms in that region,' said Calderwood, who is also on her town's conservation commission. Many blueberry farmers reported the loss of a third to half of their yields. 'There were reports of many, many acres of blueberries going unharvested because the berries had basically dehydrated on the bush,' Schattman said. Read Next Mango farms where? Climate change is scrambling where the world's food is grown. Ayurella Horn-Muller Kroeck's 2025 losses were higher than most because his farm sits on exceptionally sandy soil, which doesn't hold water well. He has crop insurance, which covers some of the loss, but that insurance is partly based on the value of previous years' yields. 'If you have losses in close succession, then your average harvest goes down,' he said. Kroeck said he has applied for state and federal relief, but that money would be applied to his 2023 losses from a late freeze, which have been on the farm's books for nearly three years. The state's wild blueberry industry has declined in recent years, both in the number of farms and the total acreage of commercial fields, according to Wild Blueberry Commission data, and financial stress is one of the reasons for that. Even Wyman's, one of the state's largest producers, plans to sell nearly 800 acres of blueberry fields this year. 'There have been some pretty significant hits to wild blueberries in Maine in general,' Kroeck said. Researchers like Schattman and Calderwood are trying to prevent climate change from being another reason that farms go under. Modeling blueberries' future At the Wyman's Research Center farm in Old Town, Schattman and the climate adaptation research team are trying to simulate potential futures for Maine's wild blueberries. Researchers are halfway through a four-year study of how temperature, rainfall, and irrigation affect wild blueberries' growing conditions — from soil health to pollination — and fruit yields. They're also testing different climate scenarios for the end of the century to see how the plants handle extremely wet, extremely dry, or variable conditions. At Crystal Spring Farm, Seth Kroeck is adding irrigation lines to part of his blueberry fields this year to protect them from drought. Sydney Cromwell / Inside Climate News The wild blueberries are grown under a range of conditions: Some have irrigation systems, some have mulch to slow moisture evaporation, and others have neither. Some bushes are grown in isolation, while others are clustered together to see how community and genetic diversity affect the plant's resilience. Schattman said open-top plexiglass structures passively trap heat around some of the blueberry plants on the farm, while others have heating coils to simulate heightened temperatures. 'We're collecting a massive amount of data,' she said. Irrigation and, to a lesser extent, mulching are already showing promise in reducing drought impact. Mulch barriers reduce soil temperatures, lower the risk of disease, and slow weed growth, but they aren't enough to avert the effects of a severe drought like 2025. '[Mulching] is a really healthy thing to do for our fields,' Calderwood said. 'It can be used as a buffer for drought, but it cannot replace irrigation.' Irrigation can be difficult with wild blueberries, since their preferred soil often isn't great for building wells or installing pipes, Schattman said. Most small growers don't have irrigation systems, leaving them vulnerable when droughts overlap with the growing season. 'Obviously, it's useless to install an irrigation system if you don't have a reliable water source,' she said. When the climate adaptation study is complete, Schattman said she hopes to have data that can create a roadmap for farmers to keep their crops healthy in future conditions. Calderwood's work at the University of Maine Cooperative Extension overlaps with Schattman's research, but much of it is hands-on in the fields of local blueberry farms. This summer, Calderwood will be working with a large producer, Brodis Blueberries, to see how plants develop in irrigated and non-irrigated portions of their fields, and whether they show signs of stress during dry periods. It's key to figure out when the timing of irrigation can make the most impact, Calderwood said, especially for farms that can't cover their entire acreage or may only be able to afford irrigation once or twice. 'Every time the pump runs, it is an expense,' she said. 'It's always expensive' Affordability is the roadblock that wild blueberry farmers keep running into when it comes to climate change, both Schattman and Calderwood said. From buying equipment to drilling wells to trucking in loads of mulch, major one-time investments are difficult for small farms with thin profit margins. 'Every farm needs irrigation, but they just simply can't afford it,' Calderwood said. Read Next America's avocado obsession is destroying Mexico's forests. Is there a fix? Ayurella Horn-Muller At Crystal Spring Farm, Kroeck is trying to apply the University of Maine's recommendations. He has brought in over 100,000 square feet of mulch, which covers less than half of his 72 acres of blueberries. The Natural Resources Conservation Service, or NRCS, which is part of the USDA, subsidized some of the costs, which range between $5,000 and $10,000 each year. 'Farmers would not do that if NRCS was not paying for it,' Calderwood said. Kroeck also bought irrigation equipment, which arrived in December. It cost $90,000 for the equipment and the new well, which will cover about a quarter of his blueberry fields. 'It's always expensive, and it's always a gigantic cash flow game,' he said. Additional state and federal investment, from funding to technical expertise, could also fast-track irrigation for small farms, Calderwood said. But in the past year, funding has trended in the opposite direction. The NRCS has lost funding and about a quarter of its staffing — more than 2,000 people — due to USDA budget cuts since the beginning of the current Trump administration. Maine also lost $15.5 million, intended for a pilot program that would have brought water management practices to between 25 and 45 wild blueberry farms, due to federal grant clawbacks. The state Drought Relief Fund has given grants for farmers to create water management plans, drill wells, or build storage ponds, but only two dozen of those were funded last year across all types of agriculture. Meanwhile, profitability of wild blueberries is being squeezed by low market prices and competition from cultivated blueberry producers, Schattman said. Costs of fertilizer, labor, and equipment have risen too. Farms are earning about 50 percent less per pound of wild blueberries than they were a few years ago, according to the Wild Blueberry Commission. Kroeck said he knows many small farms are having a hard time getting their products into large grocery store chains. 'The pricing is not very good as far as what those large chains are willing to pay,' he said. 'The market for wild blueberries has been flat or has been decreasing somewhat, and that's also very worrisome.' Kroeck is part of a group of farmers looking into selling more berries fresh instead of frozen, a move that would open up a new, potentially more profitable customer base but would also require new equipment and additional labor. Wild blueberry farmers need new markets or higher prices to afford expensive long-term projects, Schattman said. 'That's much more difficult when you're struggling to reach your sales goals,' Kroeck said. In the absence of financial and technical support, Calderwood said it's likely that only the largest berry producers will be able to protect themselves from a warming future. 'It's a puzzle to figure irrigation out, and it needs federal funding,' she said. With or without irrigation, Calderwood said she doesn't think climate change will spell doom for a plant as resilient as the wild blueberry. 'Every year, there will be blueberries to harvest,' she said. But whether there will be enough berries to keep farms in business is another matter. 'I hope that we're going to be able to make the pivots that we need to make to save the crop,' Kroeck said. This story was originally published by Grist with the headline Wild blueberry farms across Maine suffer as climate change upends growing seasons on May 16, 2026.

[Read original article](https://grist.org/food-and-agriculture/wild-blueberry-farms-across-maine-suffer-as-climate-change-upends-growing-seasons/)
