---
layout: feed_item
title: "Becoming a farmer is hard. This Michigan program wants to help."
date: 2026-06-08 08:30:00 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['urgent', 'year-2025', 'wind-power', 'renewable-energy', 'agriculture', 'climate-health', 'climate-costs', 'food-security', 'economic-impacts', 'public-health']
keywords: ['year-2025', 'urgent', 'wind-power', 'renewable-energy', 'agriculture', 'hard', 'farmer', 'becoming']
description: "faces an aging farmer population, communities are looking for ways to shore up the next generation of growers"
external_url: https://grist.org/food-and-agriculture/becoming-a-farmer-is-hard-this-michigan-program-wants-to-help/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Grist"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

As the U.S. faces an aging farmer population, communities are looking for ways to shore up the next generation of growers. But high upfront costs, access to land, and a shifting climate can make entry into the field feel out of reach for many people looking to get into the business. Tucked on farmland at the southern edge of Traverse City, Michigan, one program wants to solve some of these problems by letting aspiring farmers learn by doing. The Great Lakes Incubator Farm attracts students from all over the country. Over the course of seven months, a three-student cohort learns about topics like pest management, how to drive a tractor, and what to include in a farm business plan. 'Nobody gets into farming for sane reasons, other than the sanity of knowing where your food comes from and just general health,' said Rachel Greenberg, a 33-year-old student farmer from Indianapolis. 'The challenges are pretty never-ending.' Read Next While Zach Galifianakis finds peace in gardening, I'm at war with raccoons Matt Simon Farm bankruptcies were up 46 percent last year, according to a National Farm Bureau report. As land prices have risen due to demand from developers, more than 50,000 acres of farmland have been lost in the last two decades, research has found. Despite the headwinds, the student farmers said they're driven by wanting to know where their food comes from, to contribute to local communities, and to teach others to do the same. The farm training program — a project of the Grand Traverse Conservation District — has fewer economic pressures than running a farm business, Greenberg said. The fruits and vegetables that students grow will go to local residents who have already committed to buying the season's produce, and leftovers will be donated to food-rescue operations. Unlike a traditional business, the goal isn't to make a profit. 'The whole incubator idea is something you see a lot in the world of entrepreneurship, and it's beautiful that somebody saw that and was like, 'Why don't we just do that with farming?'' Greenberg said. Troy Saruna, 28, said at a time when climate change is driving more severe weather, he wants to better understand his impact on the natural world. Saruna worked in conservation around the country prior to the program and has no farming experience. The training program focuses on teaching regenerative agriculture, a method of farming that focuses on soil health and reduces the amount of heat-trapping gases released into the atmosphere. Student farmer Shanaya Holmes of Alabama poses by a row of spinach at the Great Lakes Incubator Farm in northern Michigan. Vivian La / IPR News 'Our food systems are just so inextricably tied to the health of the planet,' Saruna said. 'I'm just really interested in striking up a new balance where I can understand, interpret, and just develop some new instincts in terms of feeding myself and having thriving communities that also support wildlife.' Farmers with some experience also find the program helpful to more deeply develop their skills. Shanaya Holmes, 49, runs a small 4-acre farm in Alabama. She's looking to learn how to grow food in a different climate than the South and to improve her record-keeping — tracking what's been planted, what soil was used, or how much money was spent on equipment. 'It's a challenge to switch that button off to come inside and do bookwork, bookwork, bookwork when you're so used to outside, outside, outside,' she said. Read Next The USDA canceled $300M in farm grants, citing fraud. Did it make up the evidence? Ayurella Horn-Muller Adam Brown, the farm's manager and instructor, said the farmer training program is meant to be a stepping stone. 'It's really built for anybody who can then filter out and work anywhere in the food system, either manage a farm, start their own business, or any rung of that ladder where people can just help out in the food system,' Brown said. Brown, whose background is in ecology, wouldn't have pursued farming himself if it wasn't for a similar training program he did 15 years ago on the West Coast. 'I can pay it forward, my lessons, and all the wisdom that I learned throughout my years of farming, and be a mentor to these other people, and I feel like it's super important,' he said. The training program, now in its second year, is one of the only of its kind in northern Michigan, according to data from Michigan State University. Around the country, there are roughly 100 similar programs, according to a group at Tufts University that coordinates a national network of training farms, though no comprehensive list exists. The Great Lakes Incubator Farm relies mostly on a nearly $700,000 federal grant from the U.S. Department of Agriculture aimed at supporting beginner farmers. That grant ends after the harvest season in October. Brown plans to reapply for USDA funding again this year but said he's looking for backup options because of how competitive the grant program is. In 2025, the USDA canceled $148 million in grants — including some in the beginner farmer program — to comply with President Donald Trump's early executive orders targeting climate action, environmental justice, and diversity, equity, and inclusion. Adam Brown sits on a tractor at the Great Lakes Incubator Farm. Vivian La / IPR News Brown said that besides the USDA grant, there aren't many large pools of money available that support efforts to train the next generation of farmers. (The Great Lakes Incubator Farm is also supported by some state grants.) Lack of consistent funding is a big reason there aren't more of these training programs, said Jon LaPorte, a farm business management educator for Michigan State University Extension, which put together a beginner farmer's guide in partnership with the USDA last year. 'It's almost like a double-edged sword that they're trying to help people get started, but then they've got the same struggles of staying sustainable themselves,' he said. That means even as the share of young people in farming grows, programs to support them might be harder to come by, LaPorte said. In Michigan, farmers under the age of 45 increased by about 20 percent between 2017 and 2022, according to the USDA's census. Sustaining that growth will be a challenge, he said. 'Because of those hurdles, they don't all stay in, and what we want to see is more of those people being able to stay in, having more farms, more diversity of farms,' LaPorte said. 'More people involved in agriculture at that level is really, really important.' Brown, the farm manager, said students in his training program learn that the growing season doesn't always go smoothly — and challenges, like frost damage on plants, are just part of the job. 'This is a great space for failure too, right? Because there's not a whole lot of risk here,' he said. 'It's a perfect, experimental type of atmosphere.' This story was originally published by Grist with the headline Becoming a farmer is hard. This Michigan program wants to help. on Jun 8, 2026.

[Read original article](https://grist.org/food-and-agriculture/becoming-a-farmer-is-hard-this-michigan-program-wants-to-help/)
