---
layout: feed_item
title: "IMO head: Shipping decarbonisation “has started” despite green deal delay"
date: 2026-01-23 17:45:19 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['pacific-region', 'climate-targets', 'year-2023', 'oceania', 'net-zero']
keywords: ['pacific-region', 'shipping', 'decarbonisation', 'climate-targets', 'oceania', 'year-2023', 'net-zero', 'head']
description: "&#8220;I reiterate my call to industry that the decarbonisation has started"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/01/23/imo-head-shipping-decarbonisation-has-started-despite-green-deal-delay/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

The head of the United Nations body governing the global shipping industry has said that greenhouse gases from the global shipping industry will fall, whether or not the sector&#8217;s &#8220;Net Zero Framework&#8221; to cut emissions is adopted in October. Arsenio Dominguez, secretary-general of the International Maritime Organization, told a new year&#8217;s press conference in London on Friday that, even if governments don&#8217;t sign up to the framework later this year as planned, the clean-up of the industry responsible for 3% of global emissions will continue. &#8220;I reiterate my call to industry that the decarbonisation has started. There&#8217;s lots of research and development that is ongoing. There&#8217;s new plans on alternative fuels like methanol and ammonia that continue to evolve,&#8221; he told journalists. He said he has not heard any government dispute a set of decarbonisation goals agreed in 2023. These include targets to reduce emissions 20-30% on 2008 levels by 2030 and then to reach net zero emissions &#8220;by or around, i.e. close to 2050&#8221;. Oct 17, 2025 Politics US-led alliance wins a year&#8217;s delay in adoption of green shipping deal The IMO&#8217;s Net-Zero Framework will be up for approval again in October 2026, after the US and Saudi Arabia persuaded countries not to vote on it as planned Read more Jan 20, 2026 News Big fishing nations secure last-minute seat to write rules on deep sea conservation A treaty to protect the high seas entered into force this week with the backing of over 80 countries including late ratifications by Japan, China and Brazil Read more Dominguez said the 2030 emissions reduction target could be reached, although a goal for shipping to use at least 5% clean fuels by 2030 would be difficult to meet because their cost will remain high until at least the 2030s. The goals agreed in 2023 also included cutting emissions by 70-80% by 2040. In October 2025, a decision on a proposed framework of practical measures to achieve the goals, which aims to incentivise shipowners to go green by taxing polluting ships and subsidising cleaner ones, was postponed by a year after a narrow vote by governments. Ahead of that vote, the US threatened governments and their officials with sanctions, tariffs and visa restrictions &#8211; and President Donald Trump called the framework a &#8220;Green New Scam Tax on Shipping&#8221;. Dominguez said at Friday&#8217;s press conference that he had not received any official complaints about the US&#8217;s behaviour at last October&#8217;s meeting but &#8211; without naming names &#8211; he called on nations to be &#8220;more respectful&#8221; at the IMO. He added that he did not think the US would leave the IMO, saying Washington had engaged constructively on the organisation&#8217;s budget and plans. EU urged to clarify ETS position The European Union &#8211; along with Brazil and Pacific island nations &#8211; pushed hard for the framework to be adopted in October. Some developing countries were concerned that the EU would retain its charges for polluting ships under its emissions trading scheme (ETS), even if the Net Zero Framework was passed, leading to ships travelling to and from the EU being charged twice. This was an uncertainty that the US and Saudi Arabia exploited at the meeting to try and win over wavering developing countries. Most African, Asian and Caribbean nations voted for a delay. On Friday, Dominguez called on the EU &#8220;to clarify their position on the review of the ETS, in order that as we move forward, we actually don&#8217;t have two systems that are going to be basically looking for the same the same goal, the same objective.&#8221; He said he would continue to speak to EU member states, &#8220;to maintain the conversations in here, rather than move forward into fragmentation, because that will have a very detrimental effect in shipping&#8221;. &#8220;That would really create difficulties for operators, that would increase the cost, and everybody&#8217;s going to suffer from it,&#8221; he added. The IMO&#8217;s marine environment protection committee, in which governments discuss climate strategy, will meet in April although the Net Zero Framework is not scheduled to be officially discussed until October. The post IMO head: Shipping decarbonisation &#8220;has started&#8221; despite green deal delay appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/01/23/imo-head-shipping-decarbonisation-has-started-despite-green-deal-delay/)
