---
layout: feed_item
title: "DeBriefed 22 May 2026: UN adopts landmark resolution | Trump takes on 'RCP8.5' | Climate migration"
date: 2026-05-22 14:50:07 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['arctic', 'clean-energy', 'ccs', 'antarctica', 'ipcc', 'displacement', 'urgent', 'climate-costs', 'australia', 'economic-impacts']
keywords: ['adopts', 'arctic', 'debriefed', 'clean-energy', 'ccs', 'antarctica', 'ipcc', 'landmark']
description: "An essential guide to the week's key developments relating to climate change"
external_url: https://www.carbonbrief.org/debriefed-22-may-2026-un-adopts-landmark-resolution-trump-takes-on-rcp8-5-climate-migration/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Carbon Brief"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Welcome to Carbon Brief's DeBriefed. An essential guide to the week's key developments relating to climate change. This week UN adopts landmark opinion ICJ OPINION: The UN has adopted a resolution backing a landmark world court opinion stating that countries have a legal obligation to address climate change, reported the Guardian. Some 141 countries voted in favour of the resolution, while only eight voted against: the US; Israel; Iran; Russia; Belarus; Saudi Arabia; Yemen; and Liberia. There were also 28 absentations, including India and Turkey, the host of COP31. 'DETERMINED': The text adopted by the UN general assembly 'stresses' that 'climate change is an unprecedented challenge of civilizational proportions' and says the assembly is 'determined' to 'translate the court's findings into enhanced multilateral cooperation and accelerated climate action at all levels, consistent with international law'. The text 'urges' states to implement measures including 'transitioning away from fossil fuels in energy systems'. It also 'requests' the next UN secretary general to report on progress in 2027 and adds a formal follow-up to the agenda of the UN general assembly in 2028. AMENDMENTS REJECTED: A UN press summary detailed how countries rejected four proposed amendments to the text by a group of largely Arab nations. These amendments would have undercut the world court's legal advice on countries' climate obligations by saying its views should only be taken into account 'as appropriate'. They also would have added a reference to 2C, instead of focusing on 1.5C alone, got rid of the formal follow-up process in 2028 and added a reference to the role of carbon capture and storage. Scenario sceptic 'GOOD RIDDANCE': US president Donald Trump declared 'good riddance' to a very high emissions modelling scenario in a Truth Social post on Saturday, misleadingly stating that 'the United Nations TOP Climate Committee just admitted that its own projections (RCP8.5) were WRONG! WRONG! WRONG!' The post was quickly picked up by right-leaning media, including Fox News, the New York Post and the Australian. NEW SCENARIOS: Trump's claim follows the publication of a new set of emissions scenarios that will underpin research cited in the next set of reports from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). In a guest post for Carbon Brief, scientists explained that the very high emissions scenario has 'become implausible, based on trends in the costs of renewables, the emergence of climate policy and recent emission trends'. TRUMP FACTCHECKED:Carbon Brief published a factcheck of Trump's claims. It noted that the IPCC does not develop, control or own climate scenarios and has not published anything stating that any climate scenario is 'wrong'. It added: 'Projections suggest that the world is still on course for between 2.5C and 3C of warming…previously described as 'catastrophic' by the UN.' Around the world ADAPTATION NEEDED: The UK's Climate Change Committee outlined how investing in adaptation now could produce 'long-term savings', Carbon Brief reported. UK ministers are preparing to accept a CCC recommendation to 'set a legally binding goal of cutting emissions 87% by 2040', reported the Times. ELECTRIFY EVERYTHING: COP31 president-designate Murat Kurum told the Copenhagen climate ministerial that countries should be 'decarbonising the way we generate electricity, but also expanding electrification into every sphere of life', according to Climate Home News. STAFF CUT: Australia's national science agency, CSIRO, is preparing to fire one-third of the team working on the national climate model that provides future projections, reported the Guardian. TARGET MISSED: An independent body has warned that Germany is expected to miss its 2030 climate goals and emit more CO2 than previously forecast, reported Reuters. According to Deutsche Welle, the country could breach its goal by up to 100m tonnes of CO2. PEAK POWER: India's peak power demand 'smashed all records' on Tuesday, after the country's ongoing heatwave drove a 'sharp rise' in electricity consumption, according to the Economic Times. The record fell again on Thursday, said Reuters. 140 The number of countries in the world that have net-zero targets. 2 Major emitters that do not have a net-zero target – a group comprising Iran and the US, according to Carbon Brief analysis. Latest climate research Global warming above 4C is projected to cause large decreases in 'climate connectivity' between habitats for land animals | Nature Climate Change Around 6% of respiratory deaths in Brazil from 2010-20 were attributable to 'non-optimal temperatures', accounting for more than 66,000 excess deaths | PLOS Climate Fungi that cause diseases in plants will approximately double in abundance around the Antarctic Peninsula by 2100 under a moderate emissions scenario | Global Change Biology (For more, see Carbon Brief's in-depth daily summaries of the top climate news stories on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday.) Captured The world added nearly 100 gigawatts (GW) of new coal-power capacity in 2025 – the equivalent of roughly 100 large coal plants – according to the latest annual report from Global Energy Monitor (GEM). This is a ten-year high, according to Carbon Brief's coverage, which noted that the world's coal plants nevertheless generated less electricity. The chart above shows that 95% of the new coal plants were built in India and China last year. Spotlight Climate migration This week, Carbon Brief speaks to experts at a conference on migration and climate change in London about what their research could mean for how people move around the world in the future. Prof Kerilyn Schewel, assistant professor of sociology at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill We have moved beyond a 'push factor' narrative – that climate change is coming and uprooting communities – to a more nuanced perspective that recognises that people are already moving for all kinds of reasons… [For example] the more that young people are accessing formal education, the more they want to leave – particularly rural communities. We have to be very careful not to assume that when people want to leave, it is always driven by climate change. There are other developmental factors that are also shaping desires to move. This is a research frontier – seeing how environmental factors intersect with these other social or developmental outcomes. Dr Aromar Revi, founding director of the Indian Institute for Human Settlements The future of mobility is much more certain than [climate change is]. People have been mobile for a very long time. That's been an important part of the transformation of societies and economies for centuries…mobility is part of the solution [to climate change]. It is not the full solution, but it's part of the solution. People are voting with their feet and with their aspirations to make a change. Prof Nitya Rao, a professor of gender and development at the University of East Anglia There are many things that the system can do to welcome migrants and be more sensitive to different types of migrants and their needs… In the short term, [migrants] need piped water, a proper home, care for young children…In the longer term, we have to address structural inequality. There are still barriers to people accessing resources – especially productive assets such as land, capital and livestock…And these barriers are split by gender, class, ethnicity and so on. These need to be addressed, I think, to really make migration a case of [climate] adaptation and not just survival. Prof Jon Barnett, professor in the school of geography, earth and atmospheric sciences at the University of Melbourne In the Pacific islands, international migration isn't driven by climate change. It's enabled by the capacity of people to cross borders, so it's all about migration agreements. As climate change amplifies pressures on people's livelihoods, we may end up with a whole series of transnational populations that are kind of constantly in churn – where they're not just living on the island, but also in Australia, New Zealand, the US. Dr Maria Franco Gavonel, lecturer in global social policy and international development at the University of York The migration response towards almost any climate event is short lived and short distance, so it will mostly affect internal movement rather than international…So all these narratives about climate refugees – like human rights related to international migration – are overstating the extent to which this is going to happen. Dr Benoy Peter, the executive director of the Centre for Migration and Inclusive Development in India Every one of us, including you and me, have benefited from migration. Migration is the fastest way for intergenerational upward social mobility for people from socially and economically disadvantaged populations. So I see migration as a [climate] solution. Cecilia Keating also contributed to this spotlight. Read more of Carbon Brief's coverage of the conference. Watch, read, listen TICE QUESTIONED: The Bloomberg Zero podcast interviewed Richard Tice, the deputy leader of the hard-right Reform UK party, who exposed his rejection of climate science and support for the oil and gas industry. 'CLIMATE CROSSROADS': The Guardian examined how Colombia's upcoming election could leave the major oil-and-gas producer at a 'climate crossroads'. LAND GRAB: A Floodlight investigation for Inside Climate News examined 'Trump officials, billionaires and the quiet reshaping of America's public lands'. Coming up 24 May: Cyprus elections 28-29 May: Blue economy and finance forum, Monaco 28 May: International Energy Agency (IEA) World Energy Investment 2026 report launch Pick of the jobs Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, editor in chief | Salary: $140,000-$160,000. Location: Washington DC, Chicago or New York City Climate Outreach, researcher | Salary: £44,000. Location: Remote (UK) University of Manchester, research associate, energy and climate governance | Salary: £37,694-£46,049. Location: Manchester, UK DeBriefed is edited by Daisy Dunne. Please send any tips or feedback to debriefed@carbonbrief.org. This is an online version of Carbon Brief's weekly DeBriefed email newsletter. Subscribe for free here. The post DeBriefed 22 May 2026: UN adopts landmark resolution | Trump takes on 'RCP8.5' | Climate migration appeared first on Carbon Brief.

[Read original article](https://www.carbonbrief.org/debriefed-22-may-2026-un-adopts-landmark-resolution-trump-takes-on-rcp8-5-climate-migration/)
