---
layout: feed_item
title: "Q&A: How are the Winter Olympics cutting emissions and adapting to climate change?"
date: 2026-02-04 16:20:37 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['fossil-fuels', 'heatwave', 'emissions', 'renewable-energy', 'extreme-weather', 'urgent', 'clean-energy', 'year-2024']
keywords: ['fossil-fuels', 'heatwave', 'olympics', 'emissions', 'renewable-energy', 'cutting', 'extreme-weather', 'winter']
description: "As the world heats up, sport is becoming more dangerous"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/02/04/qa-how-are-the-winter-olympics-cutting-emissions-and-adapting-to-climate-change/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

As the world heats up, sport is becoming more dangerous. Many amateur athletes risk their lives running in more extreme temperatures and, even at the elite level, some have collapsed, asking officials what happens if they die in the heat of the Summer Olympics.&nbsp;But how are the Winter Games impacted? For snow sports &#8211; which will be showcased when the Winter Olympics start in the Italian Alps this week &#8211; climate change may not be as life-threatening but it is a major risk to their viability. Many ski slopes already have to produce expensive artificial snow for much of the winter. A 2024 study found that the list of cities which are reliably cold enough to host a Winter Olympics will fall from 87 to 52 by the 2050s. For the Paralympics, which are typically held in warmer March, the threat is even worse. But like any big event, the Winter Olympics contribute to climate change too. A report by Scientists for Global Responsibility estimates that the carbon footprint of the 2026 Games will be similar to the annual emissions of Somalia. On top of that, the organisers of the Milano Cortina Games have drawn criticism from green groups for partnering with Eni, an Italian energy multinational whose oil and gas production has led it to be ranked as the world’s 34th highest greenhouse gas-emitting company. For more than 16 years, Julie Duffus has worked on Olympic sustainability &#8211; first, with the organisers of London 2012, then Rio 2016 and currently as the head of sustainability at the International Olympic Committee (IOC), which picks Olympic host cities and works with them to put on the Games. Climate Home News asked Duffus how the Winter Olympics are coping with the climate crisis and what organisers are doing to reduce their role in heating up the planet. Feb 9, 2022 News Cooling towers, fake snow: What the Beijing Winter Olympics says about climate change The spectacle of fake snow and an old steel mill&#8217;s cooling towers has sparked climate debate among Olympics-watchers Read more Aug 6, 2021 News &#8216;Hottest games ever&#8217;: At the Tokyo Olympics, elite sport met the climate crisis Athletes fainted as wet bulb temperatures reached dangerous levels in Tokyo, raising questions about the future of major sporting events in an overheated world Read more Jul 3, 2024 Investigations Saudi visa crackdown left heatwave-hit Hajj pilgrims scared to ask for help Pilgrims without the right type of visa were denied medical treatment, survivors say, during a 52C heatwave which killed hundreds Read more Q: Is climate change threatening the Winter Olympics? A: We’re certainly not sitting here in denial that climate change is impacting &#8211; not just the Games actually &#8211; but all of us around the world. For years, we’ve been doing research on the impact of climate change on the Games and the future host territories. There are some scenarios where the snow is retreating and we need to address that seriously. So this is definitely something that is on our radar and that we are taking very seriously. Q: Are there plans to produce artificial snow for these Winter Olympics? And, if so, how green is that? What energy has been used to produce that? Technical snow, as it’s called, has been produced now for decades and it’s not just something that’s produced for an Olympic Games. If you go skiing pretty much anywhere in the world now, a lot of them will rely on technical snow. But Milano Cortina 2026 is significantly reducing that amount of technical snow compared to previous Games. And a lot of innovation has gone into the development of the snow machines. They’re working on HVO biofuels for the first time &#8211; so this is a very nice legacy that we will leave behind for these communities that rely on winter sports. The snow machines also have sensors so that they can track the depth of the snow that’s fallen versus the technical snow, so they can reduce quite significantly the amount of technical snow that needs to be made. And that’s a first and this is what we love about the Games because it’s pushing innovation for the future of these communities. Q: What are the organisers doing to reduce the greenhouse gas impact from the construction of venues? A: The most effective way to cut construction emissions is to avoid unnecessary construction in the first place &#8211; and that’s exactly what Milano Cortina is doing. For this Games, around 85% of the competition venues are already existing. That includes some iconic world-class venues, with a few even used back at the Olympic Games in Cortina in 1956. By relying heavily on what already exists, organisers reduce construction and related emissions that would come from any large-scale development. This is in line with IOC’s strategy to reduce the climate impact of the Games by building less. The strategy is to adapt the Games to the host, not the other way around, and to encourage organisers to use what’s already there, adding new infrastructure only when it’s genuinely needed in the long-term and for the benefit of its communities. Q: And how about the greenhouse gas impact from people travelling to the Games? A: Bringing people together to celebrate sport and unity requires travel, and travel is a source of emissions for any Games. Spectator travel is also included in the IOC’s carbon methodology, so these emissions will be measured and reported transparently after the Games. The IOC delegation are travelling by train from Switzerland, and teams will move between Milan and Cortina using public transport. At the same time, both the hosts are working to use the Games as a catalyst for public transport improvements &#8211; through upgrades to existing train and metro lines, making transport more accessible, and, as we’ve seen in many past Games editions, extending public transport services in ways that benefit host communities well beyond the event. Q: Scientists for Global Responsibility have called for spectators who travel by train, coach or car to get cheaper tickets than those fly. Would you consider that? A: We are currently researching many options to reduce our transport impacts. Both the IOC and the Organising Committee&#8217;s carbon management plans have transport as an important element, with spectators covered by the Organising Committee’s plan. Q: Over 20,000 people have signed a petition against the Games being sponsored by Italian oil and gas company Eni. Do you think this partnership will accelerate climate change by promoting a fossil fuel company? A: We’re currently at a stage in the world, not just the Games, of a transition. Eni is a domestic partner of the Milano Cortina 2026 Organising Committee, who are working with them on that transition, focusing on renewable energy and HVO biofuels. We have to face the reality that the world needs to transition and the support that we can do to promote greener renewables sources of energy is what’s needed. The legacy after the Games is that these communities are now connected to green energy and the renewable energy grid. So we need to be open to the fact that we do need to transition away from fossil fuels &#8211; but transition to green, stable renewable energy. The post Q&amp;A: How are the Winter Olympics cutting emissions and adapting to climate change? appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/02/04/qa-how-are-the-winter-olympics-cutting-emissions-and-adapting-to-climate-change/)
