---
layout: feed_item
title: "After disappointing COP30, EU mulls “less naive” strategy for climate talks"
date: 2026-02-13 09:05:56 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['food-security', 'economic-impacts', 'fossil-fuels', 'climate-costs', 'climate-policy', 'climate-summit', 'cop28', 'public-health', 'paris-agreement', 'oceania']
keywords: ['food-security', 'economic-impacts', 'fossil-fuels', 'climate-costs', 'climate-policy', 'after', 'disappointing', 'mulls']
description: "After failing to get some of their main asks at the COP30 climate summit in November, European Union environment ministers are considering a new strategy for..."
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/02/13/after-disappointing-cop30-eu-mulls-less-naive-strategy-for-climate-talks/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

After failing to get some of their main asks at the COP30 climate summit in November, European Union environment ministers are considering a new strategy for international climate negotiations which they describe as &#8220;less naive&#8221;, and more &#8220;realistic&#8221; and &#8220;pragmatic&#8221;. On their way into a meeting to discuss the strategy in Cyprus last Friday, several ministers and officials hinted that the EU should take a tougher line in the United Nations (UN) climate talks and make more use of its power as a climate finance donor and trade partner. At COP30 in the Brazilian city of Belém, the EU pushed &#8211; along with other countries including the UK and some Latin American and small island nations &#8211; for stronger outcomes on transitioning away from fossil fuels, including a global roadmap. But after fractious all-night talks, the group was left disappointed as big fossil-fuel producers and most African states did not come on board. Last week, reflecting on those results, Belgian climate minister Jean-Luc Crucke told reporters that Europe should be &#8220;realistic&#8221; and &#8220;better prepared&#8221;. Speaking in French, he said multilateralism should not mean that &#8220;it is always the same people who contribute while others do not&#8221;. Hungary&#8217;s state secretary for environmental affairs Aniko Raisz said the EU must learn the lessons of COP30. The EU &#8220;has nothing to be afraid of, nothing to be shy of, we are not lacking ambition&#8221;. But, she added, &#8220;we need realism, we need pragmatism and we need to show that we are competitive&#8221;. Nov 27, 2025 Politics EU alliance with climate-vulnerable nations frays over finance trade-off Negotiators from the EU and from small island states &#8211; usually well-aligned at UN climate talks &#8211; have expressed disappointment in each other after COP30 Read more Nov 22, 2025 News COP30 fails to land deal on fossil fuel transition but triples finance for climate adaptation Instead of a global agreement to create roadmaps to shift away from fossil fuels and end deforestation, Brazil announces voluntary initiatives Read more According to Radio France Internationale, an official from the office of French climate minister Monique Barbut told reporters before the meeting in Cyprus that the EU must be &#8220;less naive&#8221; and &#8220;more assertive, more demanding and more transactional if we want to have an impact in these negotiations&#8221;. &#8220;We are in a tougher world where the European Union, when it comes to climate negotiations, is more isolated,&#8221; the quoted official said, before questioning whether the EU should &#8220;continue to demonstrate climate and financial solidarity with countries&#8221; that have not met their obligations under the Paris Agreement. &#8220;We have tools like trade agreements,&#8221; whose implementation could be conditional on compliance with the Paris accord, the unnamed source added. Speaking after the ministers&#8217; meeting, European Climate Commissioner Wopke Hoekstra said the EU &#8220;is financing by far the most of climate action abroad&#8221; but &#8220;unfortunately, solidarity and reciprocity do not always go hand in hand. and that has to change&#8221;. According to analysis by think-tank ODI Global, the US has never paid its fair share towards rich countries&#8217; climate finance commitments and, under the Trump Administration, has now pulled back from climate finance almost entirely, leaving the EU as by far the biggest provider. Trade and finance as leverage Discussions are still at an early stage, details of the new strategy have yet to be published and the European Commission did not respond to a request for comment. But a source who speaks regularly to EU officials said they expect the bloc to become more selective in who it gives climate finance to, placing greater weight on the EU&#8217;s own commercial and geopolitical interests. The source told Climate Home News that a higher proportion of funding may be given on a country-to-country basis, rather than through UN climate funds like the Green Climate Fund (GCF) where it is harder to control. Several European nations recently blocked Oman from getting GCF climate finance for an early warning system, sparking accusations of &#8220;discrimination&#8221; and &#8220;political considerations&#8221; from developing countries. Trade could also be used as leverage. The EU&#8217;s recent trade deals with New Zealand, Kenya, Chile, India and the South American Mercosur bloc all included clauses specifying that both sides should implement the Paris climate agreement. Those provisions have yet to be used, despite backtracking on climate action from the New Zealand government. Feb 9, 2026 News Vanuatu pushes new UN resolution demanding full climate compensation The Pacific island nation wants the UN General Assembly to enforce last year&#8217;s landmark court decision on states&#8217; climate responsibility, a first draft shows Read more Feb 9, 2026 Clean Energy Frontier China maximises battery recycling to shore up critical mineral supplies Beijing is bracing for a tsunami of spent EV batteries by taking steps to boost recycling – a strategy that could also cut its reliance on imports of clean energy minerals Read more Feb 5, 2026 Politics Congress rescues aid budget from Trump&#8217;s &#8220;evisceration&#8221; but climate misses out While the package sidelines dedicated climate programmes, restored funding for nature, agriculture and health could still indirectly support climate action Read more At UN shipping talks in October, the Trump administration used threats of tariffs and visa restrictions on individual negotiators to achieve its aim of delaying green regulations, outmanoeuvring the EU and its allies. &#8220;In a world where Trump is inserting clauses into trade agreements and using bullying tactics, it&#8217;s important for Europe to look at how it can &#8211; in a values-based way &#8211; use all of its assets too,&#8221; former German climate envoy Jennifer Morgan told Climate Home News. Morgan, one of the EU&#8217;s lead negotiating figures at COP27, COP28 and COP29, said the EU should integrate climate into all areas of foreign and economic policy and combine trade, investment, climate and energy security files. She also urged the bloc&#8217;s members to hire more high-level climate diplomats. After a change in the German government, Morgan&#8217;s climate envoy position was abolished and now no major EU country has a climate diplomat of ministerial or deputy ministerial rank, making it harder to organise meetings with foreign ministers. Jennifer Morgan with advisers and ministers at COP29 on December 3, 2023 (Photo: Kiara Worth/UNFCCC) The EU&#8217;s diplomats in the European External Action Service should collaborate more with the European Commission divisions dealing with climate (DG CLIMA) and international partnerships (DG INTPA) so that the EU can &#8220;speak with one voice in capitals and internationally&#8221;, Morgan said. But, she suggested, &#8220;Trump-like transactionalism should be avoided&#8221; as &#8220;countries need to come together to build the clean economy, not divide and rule to keep the old&#8221;. Too transactional already? The EU has already faced accusations that it is too transactional and doubling down on this strategy could backfire. At COP30, negotiators from the world&#8217;s poorest countries, African nations and small islands criticised EU attempts to trade promises on adaptation finance for commitments to cut emissions. &#8220;Adaptation is a right, not a bargaining chip,&#8221; said Africa&#8217;s then lead negotiator Richard Muyungi. Avantika Goswami, climate lead at the Delhi-based Centre for Science and Environment, told Climate Home News: &#8220;It is unfortunate that the EU is seeing a fractured world and choosing to be transactional and &#8216;pragmatic&#8217;, rather than reinforcing their commitment to international cooperation and a multilateral regime based on justice and reparations.&#8221; She added that, as the EU has not yet fully eliminated its own dependence on fossil fuels, this strategy is &#8220;hypocritical&#8221;. The Asia Society Policy Institute&#8217;s Li Shuo also warned the EU against taking a harder stance. &#8220;In turbulent times, the line between assertiveness and hypocrisy grows thin,&#8221; said the China specialist, adding that the EU&#8217;s new strategy could further isolationism and damage its relationships. He said the EU should engage better with other powers like China to advance its interests. Other than an EU-China summit in July 2025, there has been little recent climate diplomacy between the two, despite hopes their partnership would deepen after Trump decided to pull the US out of the Paris Agreement. The post After disappointing COP30, EU mulls &#8220;less naive&#8221; strategy for climate talks appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/02/13/after-disappointing-cop30-eu-mulls-less-naive-strategy-for-climate-talks/)
