---
layout: feed_item
title: "oPt: Palestine: Human Rights Bulletin (Reporting period: 1 April - 30 April 2026) [EN/AR]"
date: 2026-05-08 12:47:49 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['public-health', 'urgent', 'climate-health', 'year-2026']
keywords: ['public-health', 'climate-health', 'palestine', 'human', 'rights', 'urgent', 'year-2026']
description: "Country: occupied Palestinian territory Source: UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights Please refer to the attached files"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/occupied-palestinian-territory/palestine-human-rights-bulletin-reporting-period-1-april-30-april-2026-enar
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: occupied Palestinian territory Source: UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights Please refer to the attached files. During the month of April, 122 Palestinians were killed by Israeli forces and settlers. Israeli attacks across the occupied territory were recorded on Palestinian homes, IDP shelters, places of worship, streets, vehicles, humanitarian sites, and schools. Fatalities included at least 22 children, 8 women, 2 journalists, and 6 police personnel with many more injured from all age groups and categories. This monthly bulletin by UN Human Rights in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (OHCHR OPT) offers an overview of human rights developments in OPT over the month of April. Selected sections feature examples of illustrative incidents, not exhaustive incident logs. Gaza Killings and other violence During the month of April, at least 111 Palestinians, including at least 18 children and 7 women, were reportedly killed in Israeli military attacks in Gaza, amid continuing airstrikes, artillery and naval shelling, UAV attacks, and gunfire. 8 April, near Al Nabulsi Junction, Gaza City: Al Jazeera journalist Mohamed Al Wishah was killed in an Israeli drone strike on his car, one of 295 journalists killed since October 2023 in Israeli attacks in Gaza as verified by OHCHR OPT. 11 April, Jabalia Camp: Israeli forces reportedly opened fire and killed a 10-year-old boy. 22 April, Beit Lahiya: An Israeli drone strike near Al Qassam Mosque reportedly killed 5 Palestinians including 3 boys aged 9 to 14. 24 April, Beit Lahiya: Israeli forces reportedly shelled a residential building near Kamal Adwan hospital killing a woman and her two children, a boy and a 4-year-old girl. 25 April, Gaza City: An Israeli drone struck twice a tent used as a phone charging point, killing 2 men, according to preliminary information. Documented pattern:By the end of April, the number of Palestinians killed in Israeli military attacks in Gaza since the announcement of a ceasefire agreement reached 824 according to the Palestinian Ministry of Health. Read the statement on the situation in Gaza six months after the ceasefire announcement. Attacks on law enforcement 14 April, Gaza City: An Israeli airstrike on a car driving on Al Nafaq Street reportedly killed 4 Palestinians including 2 police personnel and a 3-year-old boy. 24 April, Al Mawasi, West of Khan Younis: An Israeli drone strike reportedly hit a car transporting police personnel in the middle of the encampment of internally displaced persons (IDP) in Beer 19 area and killed 8 people, including 4 police personnel and 4 IDPs, including a 9-year-old boy. 24 April, western Gaza City: An Israeli airstrike reportedly hit a police checkpoint, killing 2 police officers and injuring 2 other Palestinians. Documented pattern: Attacks on police personnel continue to increase across Gaza. Since the beginning of 2026, OHCHR OPT has recorded 6 Israeli attacks killing 26 police personnel (25 men and 1 woman) as confirmed by the de-facto Ministry of Interior. Members of the police are civilians, and therefore, unless they are directly participating in hostilities, targeting them would violate the principle of distinction and amount to a war crime of directing an attack against civilians. Attacks on humanitarian workers and sites 6 April, Khan Younis: An Israeli airstrike reportedly killed a driver contracted by WHO while moving WHO employees to support medical evacuations. 17 April, Ash Shujaiyah, eastern Gaza City: An Israeli drone strike killed two UNICEF contractors at the Mansoura water filling point while filling trucks to deliver clean water to displaced families. 20 April, Gaza City: An Israeli airstrike hit NGO workers at a water well killing one person and injuring four others and heavily damaging the well. Documented pattern:As of 29 April, at least 593 aid workers have been killed in Israeli attacks in Gaza since October 2023 as recorded by OCHA, including eight since a ceasefire was announced on 10 October 2025. The West Bank, including East Jerusalem Killings and other violence In April, Israeli security forces killed at least 6 Palestinians including 1 woman and 4 children in the occupied West Bank, amid continued violent raids by Israeli security forces on Palestinian communities. 7 April, Jiyus town, east of Qalqilya: 68-year-old Sabriya Amin Shamasneh, a Palestinian woman, died reportedly following assault by Israeli security forces during a raid on her house. 16 April, Beit Duqqu village, northwestern Jerusalem: Israeli security forces shot and killed a 17-year-old Palestinian boy, Mohammad Murad Mahmoud Rayyan, during a raid, preventing an ambulance from reaching the boy and taking away his body. 23 April, near Nablus City: Israeli security forces shot and killed a 15-year-old Palestinian boy, Yusuf Sameh Ishtayeh during a raid in the Rafidia area. Ishtayeh was reportedly on his way home from school when he was shot in the back while running to take cover behind a car. Documented pattern: By the end of April, Israeli security forces and settlers had killed at least 1,090 Palestinians in the occupied West Bank since 7 October 2023, nearly 1 in 5 of whom were children. Settler violence In April, daily settler attacks on Palestinian communities continued across the West Bank, killing at least 4 Palestinians, including a boy. An additional killing couldn't be definitively attributed because Israeli security forces and settlers were shooting together. 8 April, Tayasir village, eastern Tubas: An Israeli settler, later identified as an off-duty soldier, shot and killed 28-year-old Alaa Khaled Subeih during a settler attack from a newly established outpost nearby. Israeli security forces reportedly delayed a Palestinian ambulance from reaching Sbeiha and withheld his body. 8 April, near Qabalan town, Nablus: Israeli settlers abducted and ill-treated a 15-year-old Palestinian boy, took him to Evyatar outpost, and held him for three hours before handing him to Israeli security forces, who interrogated and then released him. Upon release, the boy had visible signs of beating and psychological distress. 21 April, Al Mughayyir: An Israeli settler, later claimed to be a reservist by the Israeli military, shot and killed 14-year-old Aws An Na'san and 32-year-old Jihad Abu Na'em near a school (see OHCHR OPT's statement). 27 April, Jalud village, southeastern Nablus: Dozens of Israeli settlers carried out coordinated attacks, injuring 17 Palestinians including a boy, and burning 3 houses, a car, and a storage facility. Israeli security forces were present during the attack and reportedly protected the settlers, later detaining one settler for questioning. Documented pattern: At least 9 Palestinians have been killed by Israeli settlers later identified as reservists in 2026 amid an intensifying militarisation of the settler movement, and with settlers often joined and protected during attacks by Israeli security forces. Forced displacement Al Bustan, Silwan – East Jerusalem: Citing lack of Israeli building permits, Israeli authorities demolished or compelled Palestinians to demolish at least 11 houses and other structures in the neighbourhood in April forcibly displacing at least 36 Palestinians to use the land for a settlers' park, the 'King's Garden.' Batn Al Hawa, Silwan – East Jerusalem: 7 Palestinian families have received final eviction notices in April and given 21 days to leave to turn over their houses to Israeli settlers. their houses. 6 April, Al Auja, northern Jericho: Five Palestinian families have been forcibly displaced after a settler attack. 30 April, Khirbet Samra, northern Jordan Valley: Israeli settlers seized 2 groundwater wells and prevented Palestinians' access. Most of the Palestinian families in the area have previously been displaced due to settler violence before this incident, with only 2 Palestinian families remaining in the community at the time of the attack. Documented pattern: Settler violence has displaced nearly 2,000 Palestinians from 43 communities in the occupied West Bank so far in 2026 according to OCHA, including approximately 900 children. This included the partial or full displacement of at least 9 communities in the northern Jordan Valley due to settler attacks in the same time period. Attacks on religious sites and worshippers 1 April, H2 area, Hebron: Israeli security forces imposed a curfew in several neighbourhoods during settlers' celebrations of the Jewish holy day of Passover. 9 April, Al Aqsa Mosque Compound, East Jerusalem: Israeli security forces reportedly detained 10 Palestinians, including women, from the yards and the surroundings of the Compound on the first day of reopening it following 40 days of closure. 11 April, Old City, East Jerusalem: During the Saturday of Light celebrations, Israeli security forces restricted access of Christian worshippers to the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, physically assaulted several Palestinians, and reportedly detained 10 men from inside and around the Church. They also forcibly removed worshippers from the Church of St. James. 12 April, Al Aqsa Mosque, East Jerusalem: The Israeli Minister of National Security entered the Mosque with settlers under the protection of Israeli security forces who detained 3 Palestinian women and 2 men from inside the mosque. 28 April, Old City, East Jerusalem: A 36-year-old Israeli settler attacked a French nun resulting in contusions to the nun's face. The Israeli police reportedly detained the perpetrator. Documented pattern:OHCHR has been documenting a growing trend of Israeli attacks and harassment on Muslim and Christian sites and worshippers in the occupied West Bank, as well as discriminatory restrictions on their access to their respective religious sites, including during religious celebrations.

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/occupied-palestinian-territory/palestine-human-rights-bulletin-reporting-period-1-april-30-april-2026-enar)
