---
layout: feed_item
title: "What’s on the climate calendar for 2026?"
date: 2026-01-02 14:36:38 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['climate-summit', 'australia', 'oceania', 'climate-costs', 'paris-agreement', 'emissions', 'renewable-energy', 'clean-energy', 'economic-impacts', 'climate-policy']
keywords: ['what', 'climate-summit', 'australia', 'oceania', 'climate-costs', 'paris-agreement', 'calendar', 'climate']
description: "Australia and the Pacific&#8217;s initiatives for COP31 &#8211; which could continue discussions on the fossil fuel transition &#8211; will be crucial too"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/01/02/whats-on-the-climate-change-calendar-for-2026-schedule-international/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

After a tough 2025 dominated by the US opposing climate action at home and abroad, 2026 looks set to be shaped by coalitions of countries willing to bypass the COP&#8217;s need for consensus and take voluntary action as a group. While troubled multilateral talks on cleaning up plastics and shipping limp on, smaller groups of governments will gather to discuss taxing luxury air travel and planning a fair phase-out of fossil fuels. Australia and the Pacific&#8217;s initiatives for COP31 &#8211; which could continue discussions on the fossil fuel transition &#8211; will be crucial too. As always, elections will shape the year too, particularly in the Americas. Presidential elections in Brazil and Colombia will determine whether Lula and Petro&#8217;s climate progress is reversed and Congressional elections in the USA will shape whether Trump&#8217;s climate vandalism can be checked. Jan 2, 2026 Politics India, Saudi Arabia and Argentina fail to submit climate plans in 2025 About 70 governments have so far failed to submit NDC climate plans, despite a Paris Agreement requirement that governments do so every five years Read more Dec 19, 2025 Investigations Recent COP hosts Brazil and Azerbaijan linked to &#8220;super-emitting&#8221; methane plumes Satellites detect huge methane leaks from state-owned oil and gas facilities, even as more countries pledge to cut emissions of the powerful greenhouse gas Read more Dec 22, 2025 News Nine of our best climate stories from 2025 This year, we reported on palm oil being passed off as &#8216;sustainable aviation fuel&#8217;, on creative accounting in climate finance and on African countries&#8217; challenges using transition minerals to develop Read more January From January 10-12, the International Renewable Energy Agency will gather ministers and officials at its Abu Dhabi headquarters for its annual assembly and related side events. The organisation will announce new insights into whether the world is on track to meet the COP28 goal of tripling renewable energy capacity by 2030, and our editor Megan Rowling will be there to cover the summit. The next week (January 19-23) is the World Economic Forum, where the global elite gather in the Swiss mountain town of Davos. With the Trump administration trying to push climate change down the agenda in return for his participation, we&#8217;ll be looking to see if he has got his way. Donald Trump arrives at the World Economic Forum in Davos, January 26, 2018 (Photo: World Economic Forum / Boris Baldinger) February On February 7, government representatives will gather in Geneva to elect a new chair of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee on Plastic Pollution. The previous chair &#8211; Ecuadorian Luis Vayas Valdivieso &#8211; stepped down in October after failing to get governments to agree to a plastics treaty. The new chair will face a tough task reviving those talks, with governments whose economies rely on oil and gas opposing any measures to reduce plastic production. March At a still undecided date in March, the Danish government will gather a representative group of climate ministers in their capital for the Copenhagen Climate Ministerial. Expect topics to include next steps in transitioning away from fossil fuels in energy systems. Meanwhile, on March 23-27, the oil and gas industry, energy ministers and other high-flyers in business and politics will travel to the Texan oil town of Houston for the CERAWeek conference. The annual gathering offers signals of what&#8217;s happening in the real economy. Around the same time, on March 26-29, trade ministers will head to Cameroon for the World Trade Organisation&#8217;s ministerial meeting. With trade issues increasingly overlapping with the climate space, especially with the European Union&#8217;s carbon border tax coming into force at the start of 2026, the statements and discussions here will shed light on climate policy around the world. April On April 13-18, the World Bank and International Monetary Fund will hold their annual spring meetings in Washington DC. Over the last few years, both institutions have tried to get more money to climate action. But, with the head of the World Bank effectively chosen by the US president, will this push survive Donald Trump&#8217;s presence in the Oval Office? On April 28-29, the governments of Colombia and the Netherlands will co-host the first &#8220;International Conference on the Just Transition Away from Fossil Fuels&#8221; in the Colombian port city of Santa Marta. With 24 countries signing a related voluntary declaration at COP30, the conference could launch a coalition against fossil fuels that grows outside of the notoriously slow COP process. Dec 22, 2025 News Nine of our best climate stories from 2025 This year, we reported on palm oil being passed off as &#8216;sustainable aviation fuel&#8217;, on creative accounting in climate finance and on African countries&#8217; challenges using transition minerals to develop Read more Jan 2, 2026 Politics India, Saudi Arabia and Argentina fail to submit climate plans in 2025 About 70 governments have so far failed to submit NDC climate plans, despite a Paris Agreement requirement that governments do so every five years Read more May On May 11-12, the France-Africa summit will be held in the Kenyan capital of Nairobi. With Kenya and France both key backers of a coalition of countries seeking to tax luxury air travel to fund climate action, we will be looking out for progress on those proposals. The Colombian government of Gustavo Petro has inspired many climate campaigners with plans to phase out fossil fuel production. But Petro can&#8217;t run for another term and the first round of elections to replace him will take place on May 31. Who will replace him is currently highly uncertain. June On June 8-18, climate negotiators, campaigners and a select group of journalists &#8211; including Climate Home News &#8211; will travel to the German city of Bonn for the annual mid-year climate talks. Discussions on the Global Goal on Adaptation &#8211; unresolved at COP30 &#8211; will continue and the first trade-climate dialogue will be held. Overlapping this gathering will be the G7 leaders summit on the French shores of Lake Geneva (June 14) and the following week&#8217;s London Climate Week (June 21-29). The men&#8217;s football/soccer World Cup will begin in North America (June 14), with high temperatures expected. July On July 8-10, the Fund for Responding to Loss and Damage will have a board meeting in the Philippines, at which it is expected to approve its first set of projects, three and a half years after the fund&#8217;s creation grabbed headlines at COP27 in Egypt. August Dates are unconfirmed but there may be the next round of plastics treaty negotiations at some point in August or September and &#8211; with Australia and the Pacific involved in COP31 &#8211; Pacific leaders will gather for the annual Pacific Island Forum summit around this time. September Throughout September, diplomats will gather in New York for the United Nations General Assembly. Coinciding with that will be New York Climate Week (September 20-27), where power brokers in the climate world hold meetings, strike deals and make speeches. October Brazil&#8217;s president Lula has reversed the rising rainforest destruction of his predecessor Jair Bolsonaro, hosted COP30 and pushed for a roadmap towards fossil fuel phase-out. Whether he will be able to continue in that vein depends on the two rounds of presidential elections, scheduled for October 4 and 26. Polls suggest he is the clear favourite to win. Brazil’s President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva speech during the opening ceremony of the 30th Conference of the Parties (COP30). (Photo: Ueslei Marcelino/COP30) On October 13-18, the World Bank and IMF host their annual autumn meetings and on October 19-30, the biodiversity COP comes to the Armenian capital city of Yerevan, where countries will produce the first global stocktake of the landmark Global Biodiversity Framework. Research suggests some of its goals, including a target to protect 30% of land and sea ecosystems, are highly off track. November An important month starts with US midterm elections for both branches of its Congress on November 3. The Democrats are currently expected to regain control of the House but not regain the Senate, where fewer seats are up for grabs. Losing either would limit Trump&#8217;s power in the world&#8217;s second-biggest emitter. Around the same time, the annual pre-COP meeting will be held in a still-undetermined Pacific Island nation. Pacific governments hope to attract world leaders to come and see firsthand how climate change is threatening their islands. Then on November 9-20, the climate COP will take place in the Turkish seaside city of Antalya, at its Expo Center. Australia is presiding over the talks &#8211; as part of a deal with Turkiye. Expect fossil fuel phase out and adaptation to be key themes. Overlapping with COP31 will be the Marine Environment Protection Committee of the International Maritime Organisation in London (November 16-20). In 2025, the US and Saudi Arabia won a year&#8217;s delay to green shipping measures. This meeting will determine if that delay becomes permanent. December On December 14-15, the leaders of the G20 (except South Africa) have been invited for a summit in Miami. The US, which is barring South Africa partly because of its green policies, has indicated it will use the G20 to promote fossil fuels. The post What&#8217;s on the climate calendar for 2026? appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/01/02/whats-on-the-climate-change-calendar-for-2026-schedule-international/)
