---
layout: feed_item
title: "IPCC Statement on the US announcement to withdraw from participation in IPCC"
date: 2026-01-08 17:33:22 +0000
categories: [climate_science]
tags: ['year-2023', 'climate-science', 'carbon-capture', 'cop28', 'ipcc', 'climate-summit', 'ccs']
keywords: ['year-2023', 'climate-science', 'carbon-capture', 'cop28', 'ipcc', 'statement', 'announcement']
description: "The IPCC is an organisation consisting of governments that are members of the United Nations or the World Meteorological Organisation"
external_url: https://www.ipcc.ch/2026/01/08/st01-us/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "IPCC"
feed_category: "climate_science"
---

GENEVA, Jan 8 &#8211; The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has taken note of the US government&#8217;s announcement about its withdrawal from more than 60 UN and non-UN organisations, including the IPCC. The IPCC is an organisation consisting of governments that are members of the United Nations or the World Meteorological Organisation. As such, and in line with the principles governing IPCC’s work, participation in the work and processes of the IPCC is voluntary, free and open to all WMO and UN Member countries – with or without a formal announcement. &#8220;The preparation of the scientific reports agreed by the member governments for this assessment cycle is underway. The Panel continues to make decisions by consensus among its member governments at its regular Plenary sessions. Our attention remains firmly on the delivery of these reports,” said IPCC Chair Jim Skea. The IPCC is a unique interface between science and policy. Because of the IPCC’s scientific and intergovernmental nature, its assessments of scientific knowledge related to climate change provide rigorous and balanced scientific, evidence-based actionable information to the world’s decision-makers. IPCC reports provide governments at all levels with scientific information to support the development of climate policies. They also deliver key scientific inputs into international climate change negotiations under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). The IPCC is the longest-standing intergovernmental panel. It has a unique capacity to assess and synthesise the vast and exponentially growing body of scientific knowledge on climate change, its impacts, and available responses. For more information, please contact: IPCC Press Office, email: ipcc-media@wmo.int Notes for editorsWhat is the IPCC? The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is the UN body for assessing the science related to climate change. It was established by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) in 1988 to provide political leaders with periodic scientific assessments concerning climate change, its implications and risks, as well as to put forward adaptation and mitigation strategies. In the same year the UN General Assembly endorsed the action by the WMO and UNEP in jointly establishing the IPCC. It has 195 member states.Thousands of people from all over the world contribute to the work of the IPCC. For the assessment reports, experts volunteer their time as IPCC authors to assess the thousands of scientific papers published each year to provide a comprehensive summary of what is known about the drivers of climate change, its impacts and future risks, and how adaptation and mitigation can reduce those risks.The IPCC has three working groups:&nbsp;Working Group I,&nbsp;assessing&nbsp;the physical science basis of climate change;&nbsp;Working Group II,&nbsp;assessing&nbsp;impacts, adaptation and vulnerability; and&nbsp;Working Group III,&nbsp;assessing&nbsp;the mitigation of climate change. It also has a&nbsp;Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories&nbsp;that develops methodologies for measuring emissions and removals.IPCC assessments provide governments, at all levels, with scientific information that they can use to develop climate policies. IPCC assessments are a key input into the international negotiations to tackle climate change. IPCC reports are drafted and reviewed in several stages, thus guaranteeing objectivity and transparency. About the Seventh Assessment Cycle Comprehensive scientific assessment reports are published every 5 to 7 years. The IPCC is currently in its seventh assessment cycle, which formally began in July 2023 with the elections of the new&nbsp;IPCC and Taskforce Bureaus&nbsp;at the IPCC’s Plenary Session in Nairobi. &nbsp; At its first Plenary Session in the seventh assessment cycle &#8211; the 60th&nbsp;Plenary Session in Istanbul, Türkiye, in January 2024 &#8211; the Panel agreed to produce in this cycle the three Working Group contributions to the Seventh Assessment Report (AR7), namely the Working Group I report on the Physical Science Basis, the Working Group II report on Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability and the Working Group III report on Mitigation of Climate Change. The Synthesis Report of the Seventh Assessment Report will be produced after the completion of the Working Group reports and released by late 2029. During its 62nd Plenary Session held in Hangzhou, China, in February 2025, the Panel has agreed on the outlines of the three Working Group contributions to the Seventh Assessment Report (AR7). At the Panel’s most recent Plenary Session in Lima, Peru, in October 2025, member governments agreed on the scientific content of the 2027 Methodology Report on Carbon Dioxide Removal Technologies, Carbon Capture, Utilization and Storage. There, the Panel also agreed on the 2026 workplan for the three Working Group contributions to the Seventh Assessment Report. The Panel decided already during the previous cycle to produce a Special Report on Climate Change and Cities and a Methodology Report on Short-lived Climate Forcers during AR7. Scientists have also been asked to deliver a Methodology Report on Carbon Dioxide Removal Technologies, Carbon Capture Utilization and Storage.&nbsp;At the 61st Session, the Panel agreed upon the outlines for the&nbsp;Special Report on Climate Change and Cities&nbsp;scheduled for approval and publication in March 2027 and for the&nbsp;2027 IPCC Methodology Report on Inventories for Short-lived Climate Forcers&nbsp;scheduled for publication in the second half of 2027. In addition, a revision of the 1994 IPCC Technical Guidelines on impacts and adaptation as well as adaptation indicators, metrics and guidelines, will be developed in conjunction with the Working Group II report and published as a separate product. IPCC’s latest report, the Sixth Assessment Report, was completed in March 2023 with the release of its Synthesis Report, which provided direct scientific input to the First Global Stocktake process under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change at COP28 in Dubai.

[Read original article](https://www.ipcc.ch/2026/01/08/st01-us/)
