---
layout: feed_item
title: "Senior Presidential Envoy backs emergency preparedness in South Sudan amid Ebola outbreaks in Uganda and DRC"
date: 2026-06-04 08:27:39 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['climate-health', 'urgent', 'public-health']
keywords: ['public-health', 'presidential', 'climate-health', 'urgent', 'senior', 'envoy']
description: "Countries: South Sudan, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda Source: World Health Organization Juba - Today, Hon"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/south-sudan/senior-presidential-envoy-backs-emergency-preparedness-south-sudan-amid-ebola-outbreaks-uganda-and-drc
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Countries: South Sudan, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda Source: World Health Organization Juba - Today, Hon. Adut Salva Kiir, Senior Presidential Envoy on Special Programmes in South Sudan, alongside the Minister of Health, Hon. Luke Thompson Thoan and the WHO Representative for South Sudan, Dr Humphrey Karamagi, visited the National Public Health Institute (NPHI), and the Infectious Disease Unit (IDU) in Juba to strengthen emergency preparedness and response capacity in the context of the ongoing Bundibugyo Ebola Virus Disease (BVD) outbreak in the region. They were hosted by the Executive Director of the National Public Health Institute and were joined on the visit by the UNICEF Representative, plus representatives of Africa CDC, the International Medical Corps (IMC) and other health partners. South Sudan is classified as high-risk country for importation of BVD cases due to its proximity to the outbreak areas in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), and the high traffic with Uganda. This high-level visit to two of the central pillars of the preparedness and response is a reflection of the Government's commitment to do what it takes, to ensure it is appropriately prepared, and able to respond to any threat. Hon. Adut reaffirmed the Government's commitment to safeguarding the population, stating that authorities remain fully committed to enhancing all emergency preparedness and response measures, as well as streamlining coordination mechanisms. 'The health of our people is a top priority. I am grateful for the continued efforts to protect communities across the country,' She said. Given the threat of Ebola, 'it is important that we educate our people, especially at the grassroots level, to ensure they have the necessary information to protect themselves.' She also announced a donation of up to 10 vehicles from the Government, to ease movement and transport of the NPHI during this period. While at the Infectious Disease Unit, a temporary location functioning both as an isolation, and if required a treatment center for BVD, Hon Adut lauded the commitment of the health workers and encouraged them to double their efforts to ensure that health and wellbeing is protected. The current center was initially set up by WHO at the location of the future Government's forensic laboratory during the COVID-19 response. It has since continued to be repurposed for different infectious disease threats until this BVD threat. As a BVD isolation and treatment site, it is being managed by the IMC, with operations financed by European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid (ECHO) and equipment and supplies by WHO. Hon. Luke Thompson Thoan, Minister of Health, noted the challenges facing the health sector and stated that the Government is taking swift action to protect the country from disease outbreaks, including the current Ebola threat. Dr. Kediende Chong, the Executive Director of the National Public Health Institute underscored the need for the Government to commit resources to the BVD preparedness and response, highlighting the importance of the NPHIs independence. He also called for accelerated investment in the IDUs completion, so it moves from temporary, to more permanent and safe structures. Dr Humphrey Karamagi, WHO Representative underscored the risk posed by Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo to South Sudan and call for a robust and multisectoral collaboration under the leadership of the government to prepare for and response to potential Ebola outbreak and other emergencies.'Although South Sudan has not confirmed any BVD case, implementation of effective public health measures is critical in managing the risk posed by South Sudan's complex humanitarian context,' said Dr Karamagi 'to prevent an outbreak requires a very decisive action under the leadership of the government, we cannot afford to have Ebola in South Sudan, and in order to prevent it, let's put our action together as fast as possible this time in the areas of coordination, strengthening surveillance, Infection prevention and control among others.' WHO is working in high-risk locations, including Juba, Nimule, Yei Tambura, Yambio, Maridi, alongside their respective state health ministries and partners to provide strategic public health leadership and support required to ensure that all the high-risk counties are operationally ready and prepared to implement timely and effective BVD risk mitigation, detection, and response measures. For Additional Information or to Request Interviews, Please contact: Mr Atem John Ajang Communication Officer Mobile: +211 921736375 Email: atema@who.int RUTAREMARA Alice Communications officer Emaill: rutaremaraa@who.int

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/south-sudan/senior-presidential-envoy-backs-emergency-preparedness-south-sudan-amid-ebola-outbreaks-uganda-and-drc)
