---
layout: feed_item
title: "World: Crop Monitor for AMIS | No. 138 – May 2026"
date: 2026-05-28 09:46:36 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['australia', 'pacific-region', 'drought', 'oceania', 'water-crisis', 'el-nino', 'year-2026', 'weather-patterns']
keywords: ['world', 'australia', 'pacific-region', 'drought', 'oceania', 'water-crisis', 'crop', 'monitor']
description: "Country: World Source: GEOGLAM Crop Monitor Please refer to the attached file"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/world/crop-monitor-amis-no-138-may-2026
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: World Source: GEOGLAM Crop Monitor Please refer to the attached file. Overview At the end of April, overall conditions are positive for wheat, maize, rice, and soybeans. In the Northern Hemisphere, conditions are generally favourable; however, rainfall is needed in parts of Europe and in the US. For maize, harvesting is ongoing in the Southern Hemisphere, and sowing is expanding in the Northern Hemisphere. Rice conditions are mostly favourable as harvests progress in South and Southeast Asia and South America. For soybeans, harvesting is progressing with good yields in the Southern Hemisphere as sowing ramps up in the Northern Hemisphere. Crop Conditions at a Glance Wheat – In the Northern Hemisphere, conditions are generally favourable; however, rainfall is needed in parts of Europe and in the US. Maize – Conditions are favourable as harvesting is ongoing in the Southern Hemisphere and sowing is expanding in the Northern Hemisphere. Rice – Global conditions are mostly favourable as harvests progress in South and Southeast Asia and South America. Soybeans – Harvesting is progressing with good yields in the Southern Hemisphere as sowing ramps up in the Northern Hemisphere. Forecasts at a Glance Climate Influences – El Niño conditions are confidently forecast from mid-2026 to early 2027. El Niño conditions may develop soon—during May to July 2026 (61 percent chance)—and could become a moderate or strong event. Australia- The May outlook indicates likely below-average precipitation and above-average maximum temperatures across much of the country. India - The forecast for the 2026 Southwest Monsoon season (June – September) indicates likely below-average precipitation and above-average temperatures across most of the country United States– The May outlook indicates likely expansion of drought conditions in the Pacific Northwest and Northern Plains, while improvement or removal in the Western Gulf Coast Region. Wheat Conditions In the EU, winter wheat is under generally favourable conditions; however, additional rainfall is needed in central and eastern Europe to avoid rapid deterioration in crop conditions before entering the reproductive stages. In Türkiye, conditions remain favourable for winter wheat. In Ukraine, winter wheat is under favourable conditions despite frequent and prolonged frosts in April. In the Russian Federation, winter wheat is under favourable conditions. Spring wheat sowing is ongoing, albeit slowed by recent cold and wet weather. In Kazakhstan, winter wheat continues under favourable conditions. In China, winter wheat develops under favourable conditions as spring wheat sowing continues. In India, the harvest is wrapping up under favourable conditions despite some localized damage from late-season rainfall and hail. In the US, drought continues to expand across winter wheat areas. Spring wheat sowing picks up pace. In Canada, conditions have improved for winter wheat owing to recent above-average precipitation in Ontario and Quebec. In Australia, sowing is just beginning.

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/world/crop-monitor-amis-no-138-may-2026)
