---
layout: feed_item
title: "Bonn climate talks end in 'gridlock' on adaptation and emissions-cutting"
date: 2026-06-18 22:58:14 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['climate-policy', 'oceania', 'economic-impacts', 'climate-costs', 'pacific-region', 'emissions', 'urgent', 'year-2023', 'australia', 'weather-patterns']
keywords: ['climate-policy', 'oceania', 'economic-impacts', 'bonn', 'climate', 'climate-costs', 'pacific-region', 'talks']
description: "After two weeks of climate negotiations riven by arguments over finance and science, the UN climate chief expressed disappointment and denounced governments ..."
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/06/18/bonn-climate-talks-end-in-gridlock-on-adaptation-and-emissions-cutting-work/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

After two weeks of climate negotiations riven by arguments over finance and science, the UN climate chief expressed disappointment and denounced governments for 'cherry-picking' commitments they have already made and waiting for others to move first. In their final hours on Thursday evening, the talks tried – and failed – to reach a deal that would have balanced developing countries' demands for reassurance on finance to help them adapt to climate impacts with richer nations' desire to move forward with work on speeding up emissions reductions in line with science. Simon Stiell, the head of the UN climate body, released a statement as the Bonn talks wound up, saying that 'in some negotiating rooms, we've heard a familiar tendency towards you-first-ism – groups refusing to deliver commitments or allow the process to move forward unless others go first'. 'This is a recipe for gridlock when we need all negotiating tracks to be moving in the fast lane,' he added. Gridlock is where the talks ended, with countries unable to agree conclusions on at least three major areas of climate action, including adaptation and mitigation, invoking 'Rule 16'. That means they will be taken up again at COP31 in Türkiye in November. Bonn Bulletin: Finance row threatens to scupper work on adaptation goal On the emissions reduction (mitigation) work programme, pushback – primarily from fossil-fuel producing nations – has prevented any meaningful progress since its creation at COP27, as countries have been unable to come up with a united vision for its scope and purpose. Despite many countries expressing disappointment at the end of Bonn, China argued that some common ground had been found that could serve as positive elements to build on at COP31, including that 'no one is against mitigation implementation and ambition'. Adaptation 'salt in our wounds' Small island states and developing nations spoke bitterly of the lack of progress on the global goal on adaptation, which had been expected to launch technical work on putting into practice indicators agreed at COP30 in Brazil, and said it had destroyed trust between countries. Fiji's delegate described the need to adapt to evolving climate risk as a 'daily burden', which he said is a question of water and food security and, in some cases, forcing people to face relocation on the Pacific islands. 'Some of us will now travel more than 30 hours home to report that one of the most fundamental issues we sought progress on here for vulnerable countries has stalled at a time when we need guidance and outcomes the most. In light of overshoot [of 1.5C of warming] and attacks on the science, this is simply further salt in our wounds,' he told the closing plenary as the clock ticked towards midnight local time. On Wednesday, a coalition of European and climate-vulnerable developing countries accused fossil fuel interests and the 'usual suspects' of mounting 'coordinated attacks' on science, as arguments erupted over the Paris Agreement's 1.5C warming limit and its overshoot and when the next UN climate science reports should be published. Science 'under attack' from fossil fuel interests at UN climate talks Stiell urged the Turkish and Australian COP31 co-presidencies to get ministers working 'as soon as possible' on the 'thorniest issues' in the UN climate process so that negotiations can move into the 'fast lane'. The presidencies are under pressure to appoint pairs of ministers to resolve these issues earlier than usual, so that they are well-briefed and know their counterparts ahead of COP31. Alden Meyer, senior associate for climate diplomacy and geopolitics with E3G, lamented the 'limited progress in most of the negotiating rooms' over the past fortnight. 'As people across the world suffer the twin crises of mounting climate impacts as well as the sharply higher energy and food prices resulting from the war in the… Gulf, there was no sense of urgency at the Bonn climate talks.' Electrification bright spot Meyer and others observers did, however, welcome a new goal on electrification proposed by COP31 host Turkiye outside of the formal talks under the Global Climate Action Agenda, which also brings in the private sector and cities. The electrification target would strive to ramp up the share of final energy consumption provided by electricity to 35% by 2035 from about 20% today by accelerating the switch to technologies such as heat pumps, electric vehicles (EVs) and electric cookers. COP31 leaders unveil global targets, with spotlight on electrification Nonetheless, some analysts said such goals lack significance without a global plan to transition away from fossil fuels. Brazil is now working on one, with inputs from countries and civil society, but it is unclear how this will be incorporated into the UN climate process, if at all. Jasper Inventor, deputy programme director at Greenpeace International, said the stalled talks around climate finance for developing countries and a repeated deadlock on mitigation 'took some of the shine off the emergence of a coalition of countries supporting a transition away from fossil fuels at a time where the climate and energy crisis is set to be supercharged' by an emerging El Niño pattern. Bonn paves way for new just transition mechanism One key topic that advanced more calmly at the Bonn talks and even achieved some promising consensus was just transition – how to achieve a green economic and social shift that is fair from the global to the local level. Countries approved the terms of reference under which the just transition work programme (JTWP), which began in 2023, will be reviewed. And following up on a COP30 decision to develop a mechanism to guide and enable support for just transition initiatives, which was hailed by civil society as a big win, countries in Bonn provided a first set of options on its structure and other elements of how it will operate, with a view to it being launched at COP31. Comment: The UN climate process was built for negotiation – now it must support implementation Anabella Rosemberg, senior advisor on just transition at Climate Action Network International, which represents hundreds of green groups, noted that 'it will require a bit of work between now and COP31 to have an agreement'. Informal discussions could take place, for example, during Regional Climate Week in Baku in October, or at the invitation of the COP31 presidency in Australia, she added. Key considerations for the new mechanism are to include ways to provide the resources for just transition, to provide technical support, and include communities and workers, she said. 'Civil society is going to continue working. This is the legitimate space to bring the fight for just transition,' she told journalists in Bonn on Thursday. The post Bonn climate talks end in 'gridlock' on adaptation and emissions-cutting appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/06/18/bonn-climate-talks-end-in-gridlock-on-adaptation-and-emissions-cutting-work/)
