---
layout: feed_item
title: "What would Trump’s Venezuela oil plans mean for climate change?"
date: 2026-01-07 14:04:44 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['urgent', 'climate-policy', 'emissions', 'climate-costs', 'economic-impacts', 'paris-agreement', 'year-2026', 'public-health', 'fossil-fuels', 'climate-health']
keywords: ['urgent', 'climate-policy', 'trump', 'emissions', 'climate-costs', 'economic-impacts', 'would', 'what']
description: "Announcing the capture of Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro in a raid by US military forces at the weekend, Donald Trump made no secret of his ambitions to..."
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/01/07/what-would-trumps-venezuela-oil-plans-mean-for-climate-change/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Announcing the capture of Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro in a raid by US military forces at the weekend, Donald Trump made no secret of his ambitions to revive the South American nation’s ailing oil industry.&nbsp; “We&#8217;re going to have our very large United States oil companies, the biggest anywhere in the world, go in, spend billions of dollars, fix the badly broken infrastructure … and start making money for the country,” the US president told a press conference on Saturday, saying the US would “run” Venezuela. Venezuela has the largest proven crude oil reserves of any country in the world, but production in the largely state-controlled industry has fallen sharply over the past decade amid rampant corruption, mismanagement and crippling sanctions. What are the climate risks of an oil production boost? A significant production boost would unleash vast amounts of planet-heating greenhouse gases, particularly because Venezuela’s tar-like heavy oil requires energy-intensive extraction and processing techniques. The Venezuelan oil industry&#8217;s methane emissions are also among the highest in the world per unit of oil produced, as excess gas is routinely burned rather than captured. Additionally, the country&#8217;s abandoned oil wells released at least 3 million metric tons of methane last year, according to the International Energy Agency (IEA). “If oil production goes up, climate change will get worse sooner, and everybody loses, including the people of Venezuela,” John Sterman, an expert in climate and economics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, told Climate Home News. “The climate damages suffered by Venezuela, along with other countries, will almost certainly outweigh any short-term economic benefit of selling a bit more oil,&#8221; Sterman said. Jan 2, 2026 Politics India, Vietnam and Argentina fail to submit climate plans in 2025 About 70 governments have not delivered new NDCs, despite a Paris Agreement requirement that governments do so every five years Read more Jan 5, 2026 Comment COP presidencies should focus less on climate policy, more on global politics Unless host nations run climate summits in a way that accounts for the new geopolitical reality, what&#8217;s agreed at COPs won&#8217;t drive meaningful action Read more Jan 2, 2026 News What&#8217;s on the climate calendar for 2026? Elections, international talks on plastics and shipping, and gatherings of coalitions of the willing will shape climate progress in 2026 Read more How likely is a new Venezuelan oil boom? Venezuela&#8217;s distinctive dense and sticky oil, coupled with wider energy market dynamics, mean experts do not expect a surge in output in the short, or even longer, term. Getting the oil out of the ground would require eye-watering levels of investment to bring in the necessary technology and expertise. Restoring Venezuela’s oil production to its late-1990s peak of 3 million barrels a day would require $20 billion more in capital investment than the top five US oil majors combined spent globally in 2024, according to consultancy Rystad Energy. What’s on the climate calendar for 2026? US Secretary of State Marco Rubio told journalists “we are pretty certain that there will be dramatic interest from Western companies”, without naming any specific firms. By Tuesday, the three biggest US oil companies, ExxonMobil, Chevron and ConocoPhillips, had not yet held any discussions with the Trump administration about Maduro’s removal, Reuters reported, but a meeting was expected by the end of the week. According to a BloombergNEF analysis, the three US companies have cheaper and more stable investment options in Guyana, which borders Venezuela, along with Alaska and the Gulf of Mexico. It said the companies would need &#8220;stronger incentives&#8221; to lift production in Venezuela. Does the world need more oil from Venezuela? Oil majors might need a lot of convincing to pour cash into projects that could take years to yield results, especially when the world is in the midst of an oil glut. In 2025, crude oil production significantly outpaced demand, pushing prices down to the lowest level since the COVID-19 pandemic, according to the Energy Information Administration (EIA), a US federal agency.&nbsp; Data source: U.S. Energy Information Administration, Short-Term Energy Outlook, December 2025 Data source: U.S. Energy Information Administration, Short-Term Energy Outlook, December 2025 With oil demand expected to peak around 2030 under a scenario based on governments’ stated climate policies, as outlined by the IEA, any increase in Venezuelan oil output risks entering a market that may be smaller and more competitive by the time new supplies come online. In China, currently the biggest importer of Venezuelan crude, oil demand for fuel production has already flatlined due to the strong adoption of electric vehicles. Does the US have other reasons to control Venezuela&#8217;s oil? Geopolitics, rather than economics, might have played a bigger role in the US intervention. Rubio said that while the US did not need Venezuela’s oil, it would not let the country’s oil industry be controlled by US adversaries, such as China, Russia and Iran. “This is where we live, and we’re not going to allow the Western Hemisphere to be a base of operation for adversaries, competitors, and rivals of the United States,” Rubio said. “It’s as simple as that”. “New era of climate extremes” as global warming fuels devastating impacts in 2025 In response, Colombia&#8217;s environment minister Irene Vélez said on X that the US &#8220;attack&#8221; on Venezuela paved the way for &#8220;a new fossil colonialism and the end of peaceful multilateralism&#8221;. A group of Latin American countries including Brazil, Mexico and Chile issued a statement expressing concern over &#8220;any attempt at governmental control, administration, or external appropriation of natural or strategic resources, which would be incompatible with international law&#8221;. How can the world protect itself from militarism over fossil fuels? Climate advocates say the lesson that countries reliant on fossil fuel imports should draw from Trump&#8217;s actions in Venezuela is to shift away from oil and gas as fast as possible. Mads Christensen, executive director at Greenpeace International, said &#8220;the only safe path forward is a just transition away from fossil fuels, one that protects health, safeguards ecosystems, and supports communities rather than sacrificing them for short-term profit&#8221;. At COP30, more than 80 countries publicly endorsed the creation of a fossil fuel transition roadmap. The initiative will move its first steps this year under the Brazilian presidency, in partnership with the Colombian government, which will host the first global conference dedicated to the issue. &#8220;This weekend’s events should be a nudge to them all to get to work this January and start drafting emergency plans to implement this,&#8221; said Mike Davis, chief executive of the Global Witness campaign group. &#8220;The longer they delay &#8211; and the fossil fuel lobbying machine will try and delay &#8211; the weaker their strategic positions will be.&#8221; The post What would Trump’s Venezuela oil plans mean for climate change? appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/01/07/what-would-trumps-venezuela-oil-plans-mean-for-climate-change/)
