---
layout: feed_item
title: "The SEC tried to silence activist investors. Now they're fighting back."
date: 2026-04-30 08:30:00 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['year-2026']
keywords: ['tried', 'activist', 'year-2026', 'silence']
description: "Now they're pushing back with their own alternative platform, which they call the Proxy Open Exchange — or POE"
external_url: https://grist.org/accountability/the-sec-tried-to-silence-activist-investors-now-theyre-fighting-back/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Grist"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Since President Donald Trump took office, the Securities and Exchange Commission has made it harder for small and activist investors to raise concerns through the government filing system known as EDGAR. Now they're pushing back with their own alternative platform, which they call the Proxy Open Exchange — or POE. Literary puns aside, the initiative is aimed at bringing greater transparency to an increasingly restricted space. In January, the SEC said it would no longer allow investors with less than $5 million in shares to use EDGAR to send communiqués called exempt solicitations to fellow shareholders. Such documents are often used to lay out an investor's stance on a given issue, including climate action, board accountability, and diversity, equity, and inclusion. 'We believe a free market requires communication,' said Andrew Behar, CEO of the shareholder advocacy group As You Sow, which spearheaded the new site. 'If they're going to take away EDGAR, we're going to give them POE.' The response has been swift. In less than a week, POE has 63 filings, with dozens more expected. EDGAR shows just 39 exempt solicitations so far in 2026. The SEC declined to comment about POE, but has previously told Grist that limiting access to the system is an attempt to rein in the scope of government, ease burdensome regulation, and curtail the 'large volume' of requests that often require prompt attention. 'Over the years, companies have expressed concerns that this misuse has caused confusion among their investor base,' an SEC spokesperson said at the time. 'Shareholders can continue to conduct exempt solicitations through other commonly used means, such as press releases, emails, websites, and social media, and electronic shareholder forums.' Critics of the move see it as an attempt to silence irksome investors. The work-around is not the only attempt at an alternative to the official platform. The nonprofit Interfaith Center on Corporate Responsibility, for instance, recently started putting exempt solicitations and proxy memos it receives about issues relevant to its members on its website. Still, POE is the most robust effort yet to fill the gap the government created. It is designed to mimic EDGAR, Behar said. It even relies on the same set of codes — known as central index keys — to identify individuals and companies making posts. Although As You Sow reviews submissions for basic errors, it doesn't filter content, making POE, like EDGAR, open to all viewpoints. 'POE is a new and adventurous approach to try to set up a large public website that people of all persuasions can post their solicitations on,' said Tim Smith, senior policy advisor for Interfaith Center, who applauded the idea. 'It could be an investor that's filing a resolution on climate. It could be a conservative investor who decides to push a resolution that's challenging diversity, equity, or inclusion.' Any filings are subject to the same anti-fraud legal provisions required by EDGAR, says Jill Fisch, a professor of business law at the University of Pennsylvania. 'The postings have to be accurate, so that doesn't change,' she said. What is new is that POE's interface is much more user-friendly, she said, calling the government's site 'kind of old and glitchy.' Not everyone, however, is embracing the system. According to Behar, one of the world's largest proxy advisors — which helps its clients research shareholder proposals — won't consider any information that's not on the official platform. The company, ISS, declined an interview request and did not respond to written questions. Still, Fisch said the pool of potential users of the new system is vast. 'The great thing about these being public websites is that they're available to mutual funds, to smaller institutions, to universities, and so forth,' she said. She'll be curious to see data on who uses the site in the coming weeks and months. So far, though, 'it's way too early to tell.' Fisch will also be watching how corporations respond. Some, like Exxon Mobil, which has often opposed shareholder advocacy, could see it as a threat (the company did not respond to an interview request) and start their own platforms. Or, perhaps, the existence of unregulated alternatives will encourage companies to ask the SEC to push people back to EDGAR, where everything will be in the same place. Whatever the rationale, it would be relatively easy for the government to reverse course. 'Any new administration or new SEC could change this in a moment,' said Smith. That, in many ways, would be an ideal outcome for Behar, who hopes that POE will be temporary. 'We do not want this to be a necessary platform into perpetuity,' he said. 'This is hopefully short-lived. When the administration changes and the SEC returns to its core mission, we expect EDGAR to be restored because transparent information sharing is essential for the free market.' More often, though, Fisch finds that platforms like POE are one-way streets. Even if EDGAR is loosened back up, she expects people to continue finding the alternatives useful. 'Once investors figure out how cheap and easy and convenient it is to use the internet and social media to communicate, I don't think they're going to stop,' she said. 'The cat's out of the bag.' This story was originally published by Grist with the headline The SEC tried to silence activist investors. Now they're fighting back. on Apr 30, 2026.

[Read original article](https://grist.org/accountability/the-sec-tried-to-silence-activist-investors-now-theyre-fighting-back/)
