---
layout: feed_item
title: "UK halves Green Climate Fund contribution, as it spends more on security"
date: 2026-05-14 13:08:06 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['year-2024', 'el-nino', 'weather-patterns', 'urgent']
keywords: ['green', 'weather-patterns', 'el-nino', 'year-2024', 'climate', 'halves', 'urgent']
description: "The British government has notified the UN's Green Climate Fund (GCF) that it will cut the contribution it pledged for 2024-2027 in half, a GCF spokesperson ..."
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/05/14/uk-halves-green-climate-fund-contribution-as-it-spends-more-on-security/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

The British government has notified the UN's Green Climate Fund (GCF) that it will cut the contribution it pledged for 2024-2027 in half, a GCF spokesperson told Climate Home News. The reduction, which is part of a wider UK shift from development aid to military spending, will restrict the GCF's ability to fund projects that help developing countries cut emissions and adapt to climate change. Harjeet Singh, director of the Satat Sampada Climate Foundation, called the UK's decision 'moral bankruptcy', noting that Britain has a historical responsibility for climate change 'as a nation built on fossil-fuelled industrialisation'. Feb 21, 2025 News After US retreat, countries clash over who should make up Green Climate Fund shortfall At this week's board meeting, Germany and Sweden encouraged wealthier developing nations to step up – an idea rejected by Saudi Arabia Read more Mar 19, 2026 Justice UK cuts support for climate action abroad to fund military instead The UK's foreign minister said the cuts to the aid budget would 'deliver the biggest increase in defence spending since the Cold War' Read more Liane Schalatek, who observes GCF board meetings for the Heinrich Böll Foundation, said the UK's move was 'an unfortunate signal', especially as it comes just before the GCF launches its next fundraising round. She noted that the UK has been the biggest contributor to the GCF, and 'with the UK halving – where doubling would be needed – this will give permission to others to do the same'. There are fears that other countries could follow suit as governments in Europe trim their aid budgets, while the US has refused to deliver any further money under climate change-sceptic President Donald Trump and has also given up its seat on the GCF board. The GCF was established in 2010, and has since funded over $15 billion of climate projects across the developing world. Its financing comes mainly from developed countries pledging money in regular replenishment rounds. During the last GCF replenishment round in 2023, the UK's previous Conservative government promised £1.622 billion ($2.18 billion) for the 2024-27 period, with then development minister Andrew Mitchell saying the pledge 'underlines our sustained commitment to tackling climate change'. But, as of March 2026, the UK had only handed over £655 million ($885 million) of that pledge, which is its third to the fund, and has now informed the GCF it will only deliver £815 million ($1.1 billion). The GCF's total funding for the 2024-2027 period is $10.149 billion. The UK's Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office has been contacted for comment. Approved projects unaffected A GCF spokesperson told Climate Home News that all current projects under implementation have guaranteed funding while the GCF is assessing what the cuts mean for the projects that are being prepared and are expected to come before the GCF board in 2026 and 2027. 'Our focus will continue to be delivering the greatest impact with the investments we make, working with the largest network of partners in the financial architecture and mobilizing the greatest amount of resources to fulfill GCF's critical and unique mandate,' the spokesperson said. Scientists warn El Niño could intensify climate extremes in 2026 In a separate email to GCF board members, seen by Climate Home News, the GCF's executive director Mafalda Duarte warned that the cuts are 'expected to have a material impact' on the fund's work over the next two years. Duarte said the cuts were part of the UK wider decision to reduce international development spending 'and invest more in addressing growing security threats'. Development to military Announcing this decision in March, UK foreign minister Yvette Cooper said the cuts were a 'hugely difficult decision' and 'not ideological', but necessary 'to deliver the biggest increase in defence spending since the Cold War'. The US has been pressuring countries in the NATO alliance to boost military budgets as conflict surges around the world, from Ukraine to the Middle East. Cooper reiterated Labour's commitment to restore overseas development spending to 0.7% of gross national income (GNI) 'when fiscal circumstances allow', but did not provide a timeline when pressed by an opposition member of parliament. UK aid was reduced from 0.7% to 0.5% of GNI by the previous Conservative government in 2021, and is now set to fall further to 0.3%. While the UK government has claimed it is only cutting international climate finance by around 13% compared to the previous government's level of spending, analysis by Carbon Brief suggests that the real figure is close to 50% once inflation and accounting changes are considered. The leadership of the UK is currently in doubt with several ministers from the ruling Labour Party calling on Prime Minister Keir Starmer to resign, with a challenge to his leadership of the party and country expected after poor local election results for Labour. The post UK halves Green Climate Fund contribution, as it spends more on security appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/05/14/uk-halves-green-climate-fund-contribution-as-it-spends-more-on-security/)
