---
layout: feed_item
title: "Six nations at Santa Marta could shape fossil fuel futures"
date: 2026-04-29 17:18:40 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['solar-power', 'year-2026', 'renewable-energy', 'fossil-fuels', 'oceania', 'urgent', 'australia', 'emissions', 'clean-energy', 'climate-costs']
keywords: ['solar-power', 'year-2026', 'fossil-fuels', 'renewable-energy', 'santa', 'nations', 'marta', 'oceania']
description: "Christopher Wright is the principal analyst at CarbonBridge, a decarbonisation consulting firm"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/04/29/six-nations-at-santa-marta-could-shape-fossil-fuel-futures/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Christopher Wright is the principal analyst at CarbonBridge, a decarbonisation consulting firm. The Santa Marta Conference has rightly been hailed as a pivotal opportunity to re-imagine the world's relationship with fossil fuels. However, the sixty-odd countries gathered this week represent only 15% of the world's total fossil fuel production, and a small but critical handful of nations in attendance remain deeply committed to expanding their fossil fuel output. While the discussions at Santa Marta have focused on overcoming economic dependency on fossil fuels, the reality on the ground for many of these countries is that fossil fuel production continues to rise. Despite the rapid global growth of renewable electrification, fossil fuel output has similarly increased. Apr 28, 2026 News Santa Marta: Ministers grapple with practicalities of fossil fuel phase-out Around 60 governments that want to make progress on transitioning away from coal, oil and gas are meeting in Colombia to work out how they can do it an equitable way Read more Apr 21, 2026 News Fossil fuel crisis offers chance to speed up energy transition, ministers say As climate diplomacy resumes in Berlin, ministers say the Iran war-driven fuel crisis is exposing the risks of fossil dependence Read more This trend is evident even among the countries gathered at Santa Marta, where according to a CarbonBridge analysis, net fossil fuel production has grown over the last five years, particularly driven by expansions in oil and gas output. Across all countries gathered in Santa Marta, approximately 14 countries are responsible for the lion's share of oil production, which has increased by 4% since 2020. Similarly, just eight countries account for 96% of the conference's natural gas production, which has collectively grown by 5% over the past decade. While coal production has seen a slight decline since 2020, recent production increases in Turkey and Pakistan, with renewed growth in Australia, could similarly see increased production in the near future. However, most surprisingly, only six countries present at Santa Marta account for over 80% of fossil fuel production among all nations in attendance: Canada, Australia, Brasil, Mexico, Norway and Nigeria. For these nations, the transition journey ahead is complex. All six countries are aiming to significantly expand renewable energy capacities, and Norway stands as a global leader in electric vehicle adoption. However, fossil fuel production is not merely a domestic concern for these countries; it plays a central role in their international exports, and remains a foundational pillar of their economic utures. In fact, a deeper look into trends and regulatory frameworks across this suite of countries indicates that their current trajectories are geared toward continued fossil fuel expansion. CanadaIn Canada, oil and gas production continues to climb, with 2025 marking a year of record highs. Oil production rose by 4% to reach 5.34 million barrels per day (MMb/d), while natural gas production surged by 3.4%, reaching 8.2 billion gigajoules. And only yesterday, Shell made a $13.5 bln bet on Canada's oil and gas future.Led by Prime Minister Mark Carney, Canada is set to implement an industrial carbon pricing scheme and could double Canada's clean energy capacity over the next two years. However, he has also been vocal about his support for new oil and gas expansions, new pipeline developments, and has even set a goal to transform Canada's largely non-existent liquefied natural gas (LNG) industry over the next 15 years, with aspirations to rival the production capacity of the US by 2040. BrazilBrazil's state-owned oil company Petrobras has committed to a massive USD $109 billion expansion of their production to 2030. This hefty investment follows a record 11% production increase in 2025, with Petrobras pumping out 3.77 million barrels per day. Despite hosting the UN climate negotiations last year and generating 89% of the country's electricity from low-carbon sources in 2025, Brazil's drive for fossil fuel expansion highlights the gap between national climate transitions and critical export opportunities. AustraliaAustralia, the world's second-largest coal exporter, faces a similar dislocation between its domestic electricity transition and its export economy, as it prepares to assume a leadership role at COP31. Australia is home to the world's highest solar power per capita and leads the world in home battery rollouts. However, it remains critically dependent on fossil fuel exports, even as questions arise over long-term demand. Currently, gas export volumes, which dipped in 2025, are projected to reach record levels by 2027; pending legal action against the Barossa, Scarborough, and Browse expansions. While thermal coal production is projected to decline slightly through 2030, increases in metallurgical coal are expected to offset these declines, in part due to recent pro-mining regulatory shifts in Queensland. MexicoMexico is one of three major oil producers that make up over 60% of the conference's annual oil production. However, its oil industry recorded the largest output declines of any major producer in Santa Marta over the last decade. The state-owned oil company Pemex, currently carries close to $100 billion in debt, and was granted $12bn in debt support from the government last year. When combined with import shifts from the US, and potential competition from Venezuela, there is a real chance that Mexico's oil production could decline further going forward. However, the goal right now from Pemex and the Mexican government, is to increase current production by close to 10% by 2030. NigeriaNigeria's national oil company, NNPCL, has similarly seen declines over the last decade, but is now pursuing a $60 billion partnership to expand its oil and gas output and solidify its role as one of Africa's largest fossil fuel producers. This comes even as the federal government was granted $800,000 to explore opportunities to transition away from oil expansion last year. NorwayIn contrast to these countries, Norway stands as one of the few major oil producers at the conference projected to decrease its fossil fuel output. With a forecasted 15% reduction in oil and gas production by 2030, Norway appears to be taking early steps toward a transition. However, the decline in production is more a reflection of the age of its existing oil fields than a proactive shift in government policy. Despite acknowledging the need to diversify its economy, the Norwegian government continues to explore new oil and gas fields, plans to launch new licensing rounds, and hopes to spur on further oil and gas investments, which have almost doubled since 2017. For these nations, the road ahead is fraught with complexities. While the Santa Marta conference offers an opportunity for dialogue, and renewable energies will undoubtedly continue to expand, the largest fossil fuel producers gathered in Colombia remain structurally focused on growth, rather than phase-downs. Dollars and cents continue to drive economic decisions, especially in the midst of a global energy crisis. Despite growing calls to utilise this opportunity to reshape development pathways, countries most economically embedded in existing energy markets will need far more convincing, before turning their backs on billions in fossil fuel revenues. The post Six nations at Santa Marta could shape fossil fuel futures appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/04/29/six-nations-at-santa-marta-could-shape-fossil-fuel-futures/)
