---
layout: feed_item
title: "IPCC News Comment"
date: 2026-05-20 15:20:54 +0000
categories: [climate_science]
tags: ['carbon-capture', 'climate-science', 'ipcc', 'year-2023', 'cop28', 'urgent', 'ccs', 'climate-summit']
keywords: ['carbon-capture', 'comment', 'climate-science', 'ipcc', 'year-2023', 'cop28', 'news']
description: "GENEVA, May 20 – In relation to some of the recent media and social media reporting, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) wishes to clarify t..."
external_url: https://www.ipcc.ch/2026/05/20/ipcc-news-comment-scenarios/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "IPCC"
feed_category: "climate_science"
---

GENEVA, May 20 – In relation to some of the recent media and social media reporting, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) wishes to clarify that, in several instances, the paper on climate scenarios authored by the Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (https://wcrp-cmip.org/mips/scenariomip/), which inputs assumptions to part of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP) process, has been incorrectly attributed to the IPCC. The paper belongs to the broader body of scientific literature produced by the international research community, under the coordination of the World Climate Research Program, not the IPCC. It aims at producing a set of future illustrative scenarios that can be used by climate modellers to simulate the response of the Earth System to common greenhouse gas emissions. The IPCC does not conduct its own research, run models or make measurements. It does not own the scenarios described in the mentioned paper, nor does it own any of the scenarios assessed in the Sixth Assessment Report (AR6). The IPCC's role is to assess the available scientific, peer-reviewed literature relevant to climate change, currently running at approximately 50,000 papers and studies per year. The mentioned paper is within the scope of the IPCC's next assessment. Some of the recent media and social media reporting has focused on the scenario known as SSP5-8.5, previously referred to as RCP8.5. This was one of five illustrative scenarios (the most extreme in emissions until 2100) assessed in the IPCC's Sixth Assessment Report covering the range of possible future developments of drivers of climate change found in the scientific literature, and is further explained in IPCC AR6 Working Group I FAQ page. The illustrative scenarios included in AR6 describe potential society and emission evolutions starting in 2015. More recent literature reflecting the last decade of developments, such as CMIP7 scenarios, will be considered in the Seventh Assessment Report (AR7). IPCC's Sixth Assessment Report stated that human activities, principally through emissions of greenhouse gases, have unequivocally caused global warming, with global surface temperature reaching 1.1°C above 1850–1900 in 2011–2020. Continued greenhouse gas emissions will lead to increasing global warming, with the best estimate of reaching 1.5°C in the near term in considered scenarios and modelled pathways. The IPCC's last report also warned that every increment of global warming will intensify multiple and concurrent hazards. Deep, rapid, and sustained reductions in greenhouse gas emissions would lead to a discernible slowdown in global warming within around two decades and also to discernible changes in atmospheric composition within a few years. During the current, seventh assessment cycle, IPCC will once again assess new contributions to the scientific literature, including the mentioned paper. In order to avoid the risk of pre‑empting the outcomes of its assessment process, IPCC does not comment on individual papers or publications. For more information, contact:IPCC Press Office, Email: ipcc-media@wmo.int; Andrej Mahecic, +41 22 730 8516; Werani Zabula, +41 22 730 8120. Notes for editors What is the IPCC? The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is the UN body for assessing the science related to climate change. It was established by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) in 1988 to provide political leaders with periodic scientific assessments concerning climate change, its implications and risks, as well as to put forward adaptation and mitigation strategies. In the same year the UN General Assembly endorsed the action by the WMO and UNEP in jointly establishing the IPCC. It has 195 member states. Thousands of people from all over the world contribute to the work of the IPCC. For the assessment reports, experts volunteer their time as IPCC authors to assess the thousands of scientific papers published each year to provide a comprehensive summary of what is known about the drivers of climate change, its impacts and future risks, and how adaptation and mitigation can reduce those risks. The IPCC has three working groups: Working Group I, dealing with the physical science basis of climate change; Working Group II, dealing with impacts, adaptation and vulnerability; and Working Group III, dealing with the mitigation of climate change. It also has a Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories that develops methodologies for measuring emissions and removals. IPCC assessments provide governments, at all levels, with scientific information that they can use to develop climate policies. IPCC assessments are a key input into the international negotiations to tackle climate change. IPCC reports are drafted and reviewed in several stages, thus guaranteeing objectivity and transparency. About the Seventh Assessment Cycle Comprehensive scientific assessment reports are published every 5 to 7 years. The IPCC is currently in its seventh assessment cycle, which formally began in July 2023 with the elections of the new IPCC and Task Force Bureaus at the IPCC's Plenary Session in Nairobi. At its first Plenary Session in the seventh assessment cycle – the 60th Plenary Session in Istanbul, Türkiye, in January 2024 – the Panel agreed to produce in this cycle the three Working Group contributions to the Seventh Assessment Report (AR7), namely the Working Group I report on the Physical Science Basis, the Working Group II report on Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability and the Working Group III report on Mitigation of Climate Change. The Synthesis Report of the Seventh Assessment Report will be produced after the completion of the Working Group reports and released by late 2029. During its 62nd Plenary Session held in Hangzhou, China, in February 2025, the Panel has agreed on the outlines of the three Working Group contributions to the Seventh Assessment Report (AR7). At the Panel's most recent Plenary Session in Lima, Peru, in October 2025, member governments agreed on the scientific content of the 2027 Methodology Report on Carbon Dioxide Removal Technologies, Carbon Capture, Utilization and Storage. There, the Panel also agreed on the 2026 workplan for the three Working Group contributions to the Seventh Assessment Report. The Panel decided already during the previous cycle to produce a Special Report on Climate Change and Cities and a Methodology Report on Short-lived Climate Forcers during AR7. At the IPCC's 61st Plenary Session held in Sofia, Bulgaria, from 27 July to 2 August 2024, the Panel agreed upon the outlines for the Special Report on Climate Change and Cities scheduled for approval and publication in March 2027 and for the 2027 IPCC Methodology Report on Inventories for Short-lived Climate Forcers scheduled for publication in the second half 2027. In addition, a revision of the 1994 IPCC Technical Guidelines on impacts and adaptation as well as adaptation indicators, metrics and guidelines, will be developed in conjunction with the Working Group II report and published as a separate product. IPCC's latest report, the Sixth Assessment Report, was completed in March 2023 with the release of its Synthesis Report, which provided direct scientific input to the First Global Stocktake process under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change at COP28 in Dubai. For more information visit www.ipcc.ch.

[Read original article](https://www.ipcc.ch/2026/05/20/ipcc-news-comment-scenarios/)
