---
layout: feed_item
title: "Celebrating 50 Years of Bogotá’s Ciclovía and the Growth of the Open Streets Movement"
date: 2026-04-07 15:15:11 +0000
categories: [social_impact]
tags: ['year-2026', 'economic-impacts', 'climate-costs', 'california', 'usa']
keywords: ['year-2026', 'years', 'economic-impacts', 'growth', 'climate-costs', 'california', 'usa', 'celebrating']
description: "April 7, 2026 – Every Sunday morning, Bogotá, Colombia, transforms its streets"
external_url: https://www.wri.org/update/celebrating-50-years-bogota-ciclovia-open-streets
is_feed: true
source_feed: "wri.org blog posts"
feed_category: "social_impact"
---

April 7, 2026 – Every Sunday morning, Bogotá, Colombia, transforms its streets. Over 120 kilometers (745.6 miles) of major city roads are closed to cars and opened to cyclists, walkers and runners in the Sunday Ciclovía.The 50-year-old weekly tradition has evolved from a social event promoted by local activists, into a core cultural element of the city. It’s even expanded to include programs like aerobics classes, open-air concerts and cycling schools. In 2023, “the use and enjoyment of the bicycle” was formally recognized as a piece of Bogotá’s cultural heritage. Ciclovía, Bogotá's open streets event, is celebrating its 50th anniversary. Photo by Fernando Caro Archive. Other cities have taken note, and many are now following Bogotá’s lead.While the open street concept was not born in Bogotá, the city has become an inspiration to a global free streets movement. Cities around the globe, such as Los Angeles and Cape Town, South Africa, have adapted the concept to their cultures and needs.To mark its 50-year anniversary, Universidad de Los Andes in Bogotá, with the support of local and international partners, including WRI Colombia, hosted a conference to discuss the Ciclovía movement. During a session on international programs, open streets advocates shared their experiences and spoke about efforts to expand these initiatives in cities around the globe. Speakers included Marcela Guerrero from South Africa, Jose Gutierrez from Peru, and Mike Lydon and Aaron Paley from the United States. Inspirations and themes discussed during a session about international experiences from the U.S., Peru and South Africa, at a conference highlighting the 50th anniversary of Ciclovía. Illustration by Jorge Merchan, Tropinkal. Successful Open Streets Initiatives Need Ongoing SupportGovernments, activists and citizens all have roles to play in promoting and maintaining open streets initiatives.Ciclovía’s longevity can be partially explained by its deep support from the local government, activists and citizens. The City of Bogotá has consistently funded and operated Ciclovía over the past 50 years, fostering a sense of routine and community expectation every Sunday. Local activists and community organizations closely monitor its operation, advocate for improvements and hold authorities accountable. These efforts help preserve the program’s integrity and embed it as a core part of the city’s cultural fabric.In cities like Los Angeles and Cape Town, the continuity of open streets initiatives has largely depended on the leadership and persistence of local organizations. CicLAvia in Los Angeles collaborates closely with communities, local businesses, local artists and government agencies to plan its events. The program relies heavily on community support, and funding comes primarily from sponsors, donations and merchandise sales. LA Metro, the city’s public transportation system, is one of the biggest funders.Open Streets Cape Town, which operated between 2013 and 2022, advocated and organized several Open Streets Days across the city each year. These events relied heavily on donations, grants and heavy volunteer effort, with a recurring challenge of navigating costly local permits. However, other local organizations have since worked to ensure open streets initiative can keep fostering connection and reimagining public spaces in the city. For example, the Young Urbanists, a local organization, and the City of Cape Town have collaborated on a pilot program to close certain streets every Sunday during the summer.Regional Networks Inspire Activists and Expand Ideas to Other CitiesRegional networks provide a valuable platform for activists, policymakers and other stakeholders to connect and exchange knowledge. One example is the Red de Ciclovias de las Américas. The non-profit organization was founded in 2005 to unite leaders and advocates of open streets initiatives across the Americas and promote the sharing of experiences and ideas. Paley, founder of Community Arts Resources and CicLAvia, emphasized how instrumental these networks were in the early days of CicLAvia’s development.Similarly, Guerrero said that she often engaged with CicLAvia and members of the Red de Ciclovias de las Américas to offer a reference (besides Bogotá), when introducing the open streets concept to Cape Town. She also helped convene the first Open Streets for African Cities exchange, which resulted in a less formal, yet active, network among African cities. The network is often coordinated informally through WhatsApp, demonstrating how digital tools are supporting collaboration across regions.Open Streets Serve as Platforms for Rethinking NeighborhoodsThe success of open streets initiatives lies in the sense of ownership that communities bring to each event. While bicycles are a central feature of Bogotá’s Ciclovía, other cities have focused their initiatives on celebrating cultural heritage and encouraging residents to explore and discover unique aspects of their cities.Open Streets Cape Town, for example, provided dedicated spaces for local communities to imagine what they would do in a city with car-free streets. These events also provided an opportunity for people from different ethnicities and parts of the city to come together and think about how they could improve their neighborhoods, many of which were shaped around apartheid policies. Open Streets Cape Town drew large crowds to its car-free events between 2013 to 2022. Photo by Bruce Sutherland. Open Streets Can Promote Sustainable TransportationAs of 2024, Bogotá had over 600 kilometers (372.8 miles) of exclusive bike lanes, and more than 7% of all city trips were made by bicycle. While these developments came about gradually, and further improvements are needed to enhance connectivity, Ciclovía has played a significant role in inspiring citizens and local organizations to advocate for the expansion of bike networks. Many residents who now bike as a primary mode of transportation began exploring their journeys through Ciclovía, which allowed them to experience the city in a safe and car-free environment. This weekly tradition has not only encouraged cycling as a recreational activity but has also helped normalize it as a sustainable and practical means of transport.Lima, Peru used its program, Ciclodia, which was inspired by Ciclovía, as a strategy to promote the city’s expanding network of bike lanes and encourage sustainable transportation. In the 2000s, the city developed its Bicycle Lane Master Plan, which laid out a roadmap for developing nearly 300 kilometers (186.4 miles) of bike lanes along metropolitan avenues.Paley highlighted CicLAvia’s partnership with LA Metro to promote the use of public transportation in the city. CicLAvia’s events are strategically located near metro lines, and participants are encouraged to leave their cars at home and take public transportation to the events.Open Streets Bring Economic Activity to NeighborhoodsOpen streets events bring visibility to local businesses and street vendors and can offer a significant economic boost. Ricardo Montezuma, professor at Universidad Nacional de Colombia, shared during the conference that Ciclovía creates approximately 15.75 jobs per kilometer depending on the level of traffic, with the least busy tracks still generating 1.57 jobs per kilometer. Many of these jobs come from informal businesses, such as fruit and refreshment vendors and on-the-spot mechanics, generating additional income for informal workers in the city. The local government also creates jobs by employing guardians and operations professionals to ensure Ciclovía runs smoothly.CicLAvia in Los Angeles, in partnership with the University of California, Los Angeles, estimated a sales increase of up to 57% for local businesses along CicLAvia routes, further highlighting the economic value of open streets initiatives. &nbsp;Open Streets will Continue Evolving and Shaping CitiesFor the past 50 years, Ciclovía has been a defining element of Bogotá life. It has evolved into a laboratory for the discussion and implementation of sustainable mobility initiatives, as well as an inspiring model for other cities to reimagine their streets and public spaces.From increased economic activity and better public transit use to improved public spaces, panelists highlighted how open street initiatives have been adapted around the world to local contexts and attracted support from local governments, activists and communities alike.To explore further details on implementation and impact in Los Angeles, Cape Town and Lima, we invite you to review our conference proceedings.

[Read original article](https://www.wri.org/update/celebrating-50-years-bogota-ciclovia-open-streets)
