---
layout: feed_item
title: "A New Generation of Auto Workers Is Taking Shape in US Schools"
date: 2026-02-04 13:00:00 +0000
categories: [social_impact]
tags: ['solar-power', 'clean-energy', 'year-2023', 'renewable-energy']
keywords: ['generation', 'clean-energy', 'auto', 'solar-power', 'renewable-energy', 'workers', 'year-2023']
description: "Summer in Cherokee, North Carolina means many things"
external_url: https://www.wri.org/insights/new-generation-ev-workers-taking-shape-us-schools
is_feed: true
source_feed: "wri.org blog posts"
feed_category: "social_impact"
---

Summer in Cherokee, North Carolina means many things. Hot, humid afternoons. Days spent splashing in the Oconaluftee River. Munching on churros from Casa KaWi, a local favorite.For some of the area’s high school students, it also means wiring up their self-made, solar-powered electric golf carts and taking them for a spin in the Cherokee Boys Club (CBC) parking lot. Though small, this rural shop has been a forerunner in electric vehicle and renewable energy adoption in recent years, bringing electric school buses, solar power and other clean technologies to the surrounding community.But it’s not just about advancing clean tech: CBC has also set itself apart by bringing the EV transition to local students — helping prepare the next generation of auto workers for the United States’ growing green economy. A golf cart retrofitted with solar and battery power at the Cherokee Boys Club. Photo by WRI Electric School Bus Initiative The EV Industry Needs Young WorkersThe U.S. electric vehicle job market is growing rapidly — by 10% between 2022 and 2023 alone. Over 398,000 people worked in the EV sector in 2024, spanning battery-electric vehicles, hybrids and hydrogen fuel cell vehicles.At the same time that the workforce is expanding, there will be changes to existing jobs. Because EVs require fewer parts and less maintenance compared to gas-powered vehicles, maintenance worker, mechanic and technician jobs could be at risk. Protecting current auto workers will require intentional efforts to include them in the EV transition, including training, reskilling and an inclusive talent pipeline.At the same time that these shifts are happening, the U.S. is dealing with an aging auto technician population. The average age in the industry is 40 years old, and many workers are nearing retirement. It’s estimated that the country will need to add 1 million entry-level technicians in the next five years. The demand for new workers, particularly young people, to fill technician roles will remain high in the foreseeable future.With equitable investments in workforce development, the U.S. has a chance to usher new workers into good-paying, reliable jobs that will also help advance clean transportation. But it won’t happen on its own, and training needs to be at the forefront.EV training in schools is still relatively nascent. There are 1,800 schools, serving 118,000 students, accredited by the National Institute for Automotive Service Excellence (ASE), a non-profit organization focused on improving the quality of vehicle repair and service by testing and certifying automotive professionals. While ASE specifically offers certifications for high-voltage vehicle electrical safety, implementation across schools and training programs is low: WRI counted just 118 EV technician training programs across the U.S. in colleges and private institutions as of November 2025, comprising a small number of existing automotive training programs.Still, these early movers offer important examples. From the mountains of North Carolina to the bustling streets of the Bronx, New York, we looked at two innovative programs that are helping young people from historically disadvantaged communities prepare for new opportunities in the auto sector.Building EV Skills in Cherokee, North CarolinaCliff Cochran has worked as a mechanic in Cherokee, North Carolina for more than four decades, meaning he’s been through more than one new wave of technology. Today, Cliff is employed as a technician and automotive trainer with Cherokee Boys Club. The organization has been a driving force for electrification in its community, deploying 16 electric school buses (so far), one electric semi-truck, a large solar array and vehicle-to-grid charging technology. It has a microgrid in development, which will provide energy to CBC. Instructor Cliff Cochran and a high school intern working in the Cherokee Boys Club garage. Photo by Katie Tiger While the technology has changed, Cliff’s perspective is that electric vehicles share many similarities to diesel, and he enjoys training young workers on them. Cliff helps Cherokee Central High School student interns get hands-on experience with EVs and a garage setting.This past summer, Cliff and his student interns were working to convert golf carts, donated by USA Golf Carts, to solar and battery-powered electric vehicles. Students learned about basic EV safety, vehicle maintenance and the use of personal protective equipment — all without the risk of high voltage systems that heavier-duty EVs employ. Cliff offered instruction on how to wire a lithium-ion battery to the golf cart powertrain, connect solar panels to the entire system, and continuously use a multimeter (a handheld tool that measures electrical properties like voltage) during the process.By the end of the project, students were riding two functional electric golf carts around the parking lot, completely powered by the solar panels fixed to their roofs.This type of training not only generates interest among young learners, but can be easily and safely replicated to train other mechanics on how EVs are built and function. While passenger electric vehicles aren’t solar powered, many of the fundamental electrical skills are the same. As Donnie Owle, CBC Service Manager, puts it: “It's a good, basic way to show something where the voltage is not that high.” He adds that it’s a lot more fun for the students (and adults), too.Still, getting young people interested in these internships is a key challenge for CBC, which has seen applications decline steeply in recent years. Where its various programs once received 50 to 60 applications per year, in recent years, they might only have five. Owle sees electrification as an opportunity to engage young people in more exciting aspects of mechanic work, like using advanced, real-time vehicle data to track the locations and battery charge on CBC’s electric buses and trucks. Alongside solar-powered golf carts, Cherokee Boys Club boasts an electric school bus fleet and solar charging canopy. Photo by Bear Allison Adapting to New Technologies in the BronxHundreds of miles away, New York’s Bronx Community College is also working to get young people geared up for EV jobs.The Automotive Technology program at BCC, a school that primarily serves low-income students, has been evolving alongside shifts in the automotive industry for more than two decades. Originally focused on diesel and gasoline systems, it later expanded to include early-stage hybrids like the Toyota Prius. A collaboration with Toyota helped inform curriculum development around hybrid systems in 2000. BCC also formed a partnership with Nissan in September 2018 to create a training academy that prepares graduating auto technicians for factory or dealership work, including on early-stage hybrid and electric vehicles.Clement Drummond is the Director of Automotive Technology at BCC. When the program first began receiving hybrid vehicles and electric vehicles, he formed a 25-member advisory board comprising experts from dealerships, car manufacturers and EV makers to advise on course development. He later implemented a comprehensive set of safety and training protocols to address the unique risks of working on high-voltage systems, like electrical shocks. Clement Drummond, Director of Automotive Technology at Bronx Community College, showing a training platform for automotive students in the Patterson Garage. Photo by Stephanie Ly/WRI Each year, over 300 students and technicians at BCC learn about electrical hazards, proper use of personal protective equipment, basic electrical theory, and how to create a safe working environment. These protocols not only protect students and staff, but also prepare graduates for the workforce, where these skills are transferable across a wide variety of battery-powered vehicles.As the automotive sector continues to transform alongside evolving technology, Director Drummond is focused on future-ready training. In February 2023, BCC completed a garage facility transformation with state-of-the-art training materials, such as vehicle lifts and specialized tools to work on EVs. In October 2025, the college announced a partnership with Waymo to train students on autonomous vehicle technology, expanding hands-on learning and preparing students for promising jobs.Graduates have gone on to work in good-paying positions across the automotive industry, with salaries for electric vehicle technicians ranging as high as $90,000 per year in New York. BCC’s approach can serve as a role model for other community colleges and technician training programs.A Time to InvestWhile the EV industry continues to innovate and expand, recent setbacks in federal clean transportation investments have hindered growth and slowed workforce development. Yet organizations like CBC and BCC are forging ahead and can light the way for others. Sustained investment in the workforce is essential: By leveraging proven training models from fleet operators and private sector partnerships, we can ensure workers are ready to adapt to new technology and take advantage of high-paying careers in their field.

[Read original article](https://www.wri.org/insights/new-generation-ev-workers-taking-shape-us-schools)
