---
layout: feed_item
title: "Kenya seeks regional coordination to build African mineral value chains"
date: 2026-04-30 15:41:56 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['renewable-energy', 'wind-power', 'climate-costs', 'year-2026', 'economic-impacts']
keywords: ['kenya', 'renewable-energy', 'wind-power', 'climate-costs', 'year-2026', 'economic-impacts', 'regional', 'seeks']
description: "African leaders have intensified calls for governments to stop exporting raw minerals and step up efforts to align their policies, share infrastructure and c..."
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/04/30/kenya-seeks-regional-coordination-to-build-african-mineral-value-chains/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

African leaders have intensified calls for governments to stop exporting raw minerals and step up efforts to align their policies, share infrastructure and coordinate investment to add value to their resources and bring economic prosperity to the continent. In a speech to the inaugural Kenya Mining Investment Conference & Expo in Nairobi this week, Kenyan President William Ruto became the latest African leader to confirm the country will end exports of raw mineral ore. The East African nation has deposits of gold, iron ore and copper and recently launched a tender for global investors to develop a deposit of rare earths, which are used in EV motors and wind turbines, valued at $62 billion. Kenya is among more than a dozen African nations that have either banned or imposed export curbs on their mineral resources as they seek to process minerals domestically to boost revenues, create jobs and capture a slice of the industries that are producing high-value clean tech for the energy transition. Mar 11, 2026 Clean Energy Frontier Africa needs more than export bans to cash in on critical minerals, experts say Restricting raw materials exports is well-intentioned but without other policies to foster domestic processing, they can backfire Read more Mar 6, 2026 Clean Energy Frontier South African rare earths project aims to rival Chinese with low-cost model The EU-backed Zandkopsdrift project plans to offset the high cost of rare earths production with another mineral in hot demand for use in batteries Read more Feb 3, 2026 Clean Energy Frontier West Africa's first lithium mine awaits go-ahead as Ghana seeks better deal Ghana wants to benefit from the scramble for lithium but its reliance on mining firms for revenue and expertise weakens its ability to negotiate preferential terms, experts say Read more 'For too long we have extracted and exported raw materials at the bottom of the value chain, while others have processed, refined, manufactured and captured the greater share of economic value,' Ruto told African ministers and stakeholders gathered at the mining investment conference in Nairobi. As a result, Africa currently captures less than 1% of the value generated from global clean energy technologies, he said. To address this, Kenya, in collaboration with other African nations, 'will process our minerals here in the continent, we will refine them here and we will manufacture them here', he added. Mineral export restrictions on the rise Africa is a major supplier of minerals needed for the global energy transition. The continent holds an estimated 30% of the world's critical mineral reserves, including lithium, cobalt and copper. The Democratic Republic of Congo produces roughly 70% of global cobalt, a key ingredient in lithium-ion batteries, while countries such as Guinea dominate bauxite production, and Mozambique and Tanzania hold significant graphite deposits. But African governments have struggled to attract the investment needed to turn their vast mineral wealth into a green industrial powerhouse. Recently Burundi, Malawi, Nigeria and Zimbabwe are among those that have resorted to banning the export of unrefined minerals to incentivise foreign companies to invest in value addition locally. Outdated geological data limits Africa's push to benefit from its mineral wealth This week, Zimbabwe exported its first shipments of lithium sulphate, an intermediate form of processed lithium that can be further refined into battery-grade material, from a mine and processing plant operated by Chinese company Zhejiang Huayou Cobalt. After freezing all exports of lithium concentrate – the first stage of processing – earlier this year, the government introduced export quotas and will ban all exports from January 2027. Export restrictions on critical raw materials have grown more than five-fold since 2009, found a report by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) published this week. In 2024, a more diverse group of countries, including many resource-rich developing economies in Africa and Asia, introduced restrictions, including Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Angola. Artisanal miners look for copper in mining waste This is 'a structural shift in the wrong direction,' Mathias Cormann, the OECD's secretary-general, told the organisations' Critical Minerals Forum in Istanbul, Turkey, this week. 'We understand the motivations: building local industries, managing environmental impacts, capturing greater value domestically. But our research is quite clear. Export restrictions distort investment, reduce volumes and undermine supply security often while delivering limited gains in value added,' he said. In-country barriers to success Thomas Scurfield, Africa senior economic analyst at the Natural Resource Governance Institute, told Climate Home News that export restrictions 'can look like a promising route to local value addition' for cash-strapped African mineral producers but have 'rarely worked' unless countries already have reliable energy, infrastructure and competitive costs for processing. 'Without those conditions, bans may simply push companies to scale back mining rather than scale up processing,' he said. Alaka Lugonzo, partnerships lead for Africa at Global Witness, identified gaps in practical skills and infrastructure as other major barriers. 'You need engineers, geologists, marketers,' Lugonzo said, warning that graduates are increasingly unable to match the pace of industry change. On infrastructure, she said that plentiful and stable energy supplies are vital and while Kenya has relatively robust road networks, they are insufficient for industrial-scale operations. 'Meaningful value addition and real industrialisation requires heavy machinery… and you will need better infrastructure,' she said, highlighting persistent last-mile challenges in mining regions where 'there's no railway, there's no electricity, there's no water'. Export capacity is another concern, she said, particularly whether existing port systems could handle increased volumes of processed minerals. Regional approach recommended Scurfield said that through regional cooperation – including pooling supplies, specialising across different stages of refining and manufacturing, and building larger regional markets – 'African countries could overcome many domestic constraints that make going alone difficult'. That's what close to 20 African governments are working to deliver as part of the Africa Minerals Strategy Group, which was set up by African ministers and is dedicated to foster cooperation among African nations to build mineral value chains and better benefit from the energy transition. Africa urged to unite on minerals as US strikes bilateral deals Nigerian Minister of Solid Minerals Dele Alake, who chairs the group, said 'true collaboration' between countries, including aligning mining policies, sharing infrastructure, coordinating investment strategies and promoting trade across the continent, will create the conditions for long-term investments that could turn Africa into 'a formidable and competitive force within the global mineral supply chain'. 'The time has come for Africa to redefine its place within the global mineral economy and that transformation must begin with regional integration and regional cooperation,' he told the mining investment conference in Nairobi. Lugonzo of Global Witness agreed, saying that value-addition would benefit from adopting a continental perspective. 'Why should Kenya build another smelter when we can export our gold to Tanzania for smelting, and then we use the pipeline through Uganda to take it to the port and we export it?' she asked. To facilitate that, there is a need to operationalise the Africa Free Trade Continental Agreement (AFTCA), she added. 'That agreement is the only way Africa is going to move from point A to point B.' The post Kenya seeks regional coordination to build African mineral value chains appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/04/30/kenya-seeks-regional-coordination-to-build-african-mineral-value-chains/)
