---
layout: feed_item
title: "Cropped 11 February 2026: Aftershocks of US withdrawals | Biodiversity and business risks | Deep-sea mining tensions"
date: 2026-02-11 15:51:06 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['pacific-region', 'food-security', 'urgent', 'drought', 'water-crisis', 'agriculture', 'economic-impacts', 'year-2026', 'flooding', 'climate-costs']
keywords: ['pacific-region', 'food-security', 'urgent', 'drought', 'water-crisis', 'february', 'cropped', 'aftershocks']
description: "We handpick and explain the most important stories at the intersection of climate, land, food and nature over the past fortnight"
external_url: https://www.carbonbrief.org/cropped-11-february-2026-aftershocks-of-us-withdrawals-biodiversity-and-business-risks-deep-sea-mining-tensions/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Carbon Brief"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

We handpick and explain the most important stories at the intersection of climate, land, food and nature over the past fortnight. This is an online version of Carbon Brief’s fortnightly Cropped email newsletter. Subscribe for&nbsp;free here. This is the last edition of Cropped for 2025. The newsletter will return on 14 January 2026. Key developments Economic risks from nature loss RISKY BUSINESS: The “undervaluing” of nature by businesses is fuelling its decline and putting the global economy at risk, according to a new report covered by Carbon Brief. The Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) “business and biodiversity” report “urg[ed] companies to act now or potentially face extinction themselves”, Reuters wrote.&nbsp; BUSINESS ACTION: The report was agreed at an IPBES meeting in Manchester last week. Speaking to Carbon Brief at the meeting, IPBES chair, Dr David Obura, said the findings showed that “all sectors” of business “need to respond to biodiversity loss and minimise their impacts”. Bloomberg quoted Prof Stephen Polasky, co-chair of the report, as saying: “Too often, at present, what’s good for business is bad for nature and vice-versa.”&nbsp; Tensions in deep-sea mining Subscribe: CroppedSign up to Carbon Brief's free \\"Cropped\\" email newsletter. A fortnightly digest of food, land and nature news and views. Sent to your inbox every other Wednesday. JAPAN’S TAKEOFF: Japan’s prime minister, Sanae Takaichi, announced on 2 February that the country became the first in the world to extract rare earths from the deep seabed after successful retrievals near Minamitori Island, in the central Pacific Ocean, according to Asia Financial. The country hailed the move as a “first step toward industrialisation of domestically produced rare earth” metals, Takaichi said.&nbsp; URGENT CALL: On 5 February, the International Seabed Authority (ISA) secretary general, Leticia Reis de Carvalho, called on EU officials to “quickly agree on an international rule book on the extraction of critical minerals in international waters”, due to be finalised later this year, Euractiv reported. The bloc has supported a proposed moratorium on deep-sea mining. However, the US has “taken the opposite approach”, fast-tracking a single permit for exploration and exploitation of seabed resources, and “might be pushing the EU – and others” to follow suit, the outlet added. CAUTIONARY COMMENT: In the Inter Press Service, the former president of the Seychelles and a Swiss philanthropist highlighted the important role of African leadership in global ocean governance. It called for a precautionary pause on deep-sea mining due to the potential harmful effects of this extractive activity on biodiversity, food security and the economy. They wrote: “The accelerating push for deep-sea mining activities also raises concerns about repeating historic patterns seen in other extractive sectors across Africa.” News and views ARGENTINE AUSTERITY: The Argentinian government’s response to the worst wildfires to hit Patagonia “in decades” has been hindered by president Javier Milei’s “gutting” of the country’s fire-management agency, the Associated Press reported. Carbon Brief covered a new rapid-attribution analysis of the fires, which found that climate change made the hot, dry conditions that preceded the fires more than twice as likely. CRISIS IN SOMALIA: The Somali government has begun “emergency talks” to address the drought that is gripping much of the country, according to Shabelle Media. The outlet wrote that the “crisis has reached a critical stage” amid “worsening shortages of water, food and pasture threatening both human life and livestock”. FOOD PRICES FALL: The UN Food and Agriculture Organization’s “food price index” – a measure of the costs of key food commodities around the world – fell in January for the fifth month in a row. The fall was driven by decreases in the price of dairy, meat and sugar, which “more than offset” increasing prices of cereals and vegetable oil, according to the FAO. HIGH STANDARDS: The Greenhouse Gas Protocol launched a new standard for companies to measure emissions and carbon removals from land use and emerging technologies. BusinessGreen said that the standard is “expected to provide a boost to the expanding carbon removals and carbon credit sectors by providing an agreed measurement protocol”. RUNNING OUT OF TIME: Negotiators from the seven US states that share the Colorado River basin met in Washington DC ahead of a 14 February deadline for agreeing a joint plan for managing the basin’s reservoirs. The Colorado Sun wrote: “The next agreement will impact growing cities, massive agricultural industries, hydroelectric power supplies and endangered species for years to come.” CORAL COVER: Malaysia has lost around 20% of its coral reefs since 2022, “with reef conditions continuing to deteriorate nationwide”, the Star – a Malaysian online news outlet – reported. The ongoing decline has many drivers, it added, including a global bleaching event in 2024, pollution and unsustainable tourism and development. Spotlight Aftershocks of US exiting major nature-science body This week, Carbon Brief reports on the impacts of the US withdrawal from the global nature-science panel, IPBES. The Trump administration’s decision to withdraw the US from the world’s main expert panel that advises policymakers on biodiversity and ecosystem science “harms everybody, including themselves”. That’s according to Dr David Obura, chair of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services, or IPBES.&nbsp;&nbsp; IPBES is among the dozens of international organisations dealing with the fallout from the US government’s announcement last month.&nbsp; The panel’s chief executive, Dr Luthando Dziba, told Carbon Brief that the exit impacts both the panel’s finances and the involvement of important scientists. He said:&nbsp; “The US was one of the founding members of IPBES…A lot of US experts contribute to our assessments and they’ve led our assessments in various capacities. They’ve also served in various official bodies of the platform.” Obura told Carbon Brief that “it’s very important to try and keep pushing through with the knowledge and keep doing the work that we&#8217;re doing”. He said he hopes the US will rejoin in future.&nbsp; Carbon Brief attended the first IPBES meeting since Trump’s announcement, held last week in Manchester. At the meeting, countries finalised a new “business and biodiversity” report.&nbsp; For the first time in the 14-year history of IPBES, there was no US government delegation present at the meeting, although some US scientists attended in other roles.&nbsp; Cashflow impacts Dziba is still waiting for official confirmation of the US withdrawal, but impacts were being felt even before last month’s announcement.&nbsp; Budget information [pdf] from last October shows that the US contributed the most money to IPBES of any country in 2024 – around $1.2m. In 2025, when Trump took office, it sent $0, as of October.&nbsp; Despite this, IPBES actually received around $1.2m extra funding from countries in 2025, compared to 2024, as other nations filled the gap.&nbsp; The UK, for example, increased its contribution from around $367,000 in 2024 to more than $1.7m in 2025. The EU, which did not contribute in 2024 but tends to make multi-year payments, paid around $2.7m last year. These two payments made up the bulk of the increase in overall funding.&nbsp; Wider effects of US exit&nbsp; Dziba said IPBES is looking at other ways of boosting funds in future, but noted that lost income is not the only concern:&nbsp; “For us, the withdrawal of the US is actually much larger than just the budgetary implications, because you can find somebody who can come in and increase the contribution and close that gap.&nbsp; “The US has got thousands of leading experts in the fields where we undertake assessments. We know that some of them work for [the] government and maybe [for] those it will be more challenging for them to continue…But there are many other experts that we hope, in some way, will still be able to contribute to the work of the platform.”&nbsp; One person trying to keep US scientists involved is Prof Pam McElwee, a professor of human ecology at Rutgers University. She told Carbon Brief that “there are still a tonne of American scientists and other civil society organisations that want to stand up”.&nbsp; McElwee and others have looked at ways for US scientists to access funding to continue working with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which the US has also withdrawn from. She said they will try and do the same at IPBES, adding:&nbsp; “It&#8217;s basically a bottom-up initiative&#8230;to make the message clear that scientists in the US still support these institutions and we still are part of them. “Climate science is what it is and we can’t deny or withdraw from it. So we’ll just keep trying to represent it as best we can.”&nbsp; Watch, read, listen UNDER THE SEA: An article in bioGraphic explored whether the skeletons of dead corals “help or hinder recovery” on bleached reefs.&nbsp; MOSSY MOORS: BBC News covered how “extinct moss” is being reintroduced in some English moors in an effort to “create diverse habitats for wildlife”.&nbsp; RIBBIT: Scientists are “racing” to map out Ecuador’s “unique biological heritage of more than 700 frog species”, reported Dialogue Earth.&nbsp; MEAT COMEBACK: Grist examined the rise and fall of vegan fine dining.&nbsp;&nbsp; New science Areas suitable for grazing animals could shrink by 36-50% by 2100 due to continued climate change, with areas of extreme poverty and political fragility experiencing the highest losses | Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences The body condition of Svalbard polar bears increased after 2000, in a period of rapid loss of ice cover | Scientific Reports Studies projecting the possibility of reversing biodiversity loss are scarce and most do not account for additional drivers of loss, such as climate change, according to a meta-analysis of more than 55 papers | Science Advances In the diary 9-12 February: Climate and cryosphere open science conference | Wellington, New Zealand 18 February: International conservation technology conference | Lima, Peru 22-27 February: American Geophysical Union’s ocean sciences meeting | Glasgow, UK Cropped is researched and written by Dr Giuliana Viglione, Aruna Chandrasekhar, Daisy Dunne, Orla Dwyer and Yanine Quiroz. &nbsp;Please send tips and feedback to cropped@carbonbrief.org Cropped 28 January 2026: Ocean biodiversity boost; Nature and national security; Mangrove defence Cropped | 28.01.26 Cropped 14 January 2026: Wildfires scorch three continents; EU trade; Food and nature in 2026 Cropped | 14.01.26 Cropped 17 December 2025: ‘Deadly’ Asia floods; Boosting London’s water birds; UN headwinds Cropped | 17.12.25 Cropped 3 December 2025: Extreme weather in Africa; COP30 roundup; Saudi minister interview Cropped | 03.12.25 The post Cropped 11 February 2026: Aftershocks of US withdrawals | Biodiversity and business risks | Deep-sea mining tensions appeared first on Carbon Brief.

[Read original article](https://www.carbonbrief.org/cropped-11-february-2026-aftershocks-of-us-withdrawals-biodiversity-and-business-risks-deep-sea-mining-tensions/)
