---
layout: feed_item
title: "UNICEF Mozambique Humanitarian Situation Report No. 2, 28 February 2026"
date: 2026-05-01 03:47:41 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['flooding', 'renewable-energy', 'urgent', 'extreme-weather', 'climate-health', 'wind-power', 'year-2026', 'cyclone', 'tropical-storms', 'public-health']
keywords: ['unicef', 'flooding', 'humanitarian', 'renewable-energy', 'urgent', 'extreme-weather', 'climate-health', 'mozambique']
description: "Country: Mozambique Source: UN Children's Fund Please refer to the attached file"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/mozambique/unicef-mozambique-humanitarian-situation-report-no-2-28-february-2026
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: Mozambique Source: UN Children's Fund Please refer to the attached file. Highlights In Mozambique, there are 661,532 internally displaced people of whom 54 per cent are children, representing an increase by nine per cent compared to the previous assessment - Cholera cases rose sharply, expanding from 13 to 23 districts, with 2,845 new cases reported, a 74 per cent increase. UNICEF supported Preventive oral cholera vaccination campaigns reaching more than 385,000 people. UNICEF delivered Ready-to-Use Therapeutic Food (RUTF), providing life-saving treatment to 5,136 children under 5 with severe acute malnutrition. Nearly 87,000 people had access to safe water provided by UNICEF through the rehabilitation and construction new boreholes, water supply systems. UNICEF supported the safe return to school and continuity of learning for 48,339 children (24,973 girls) across Cabo Delgado, Gaza and Nampula provinces. SITUATION OVERVIEW AND HUMANITARIAN NEEDS In February 2026, the Non- State Armed Groups (NSAGs) carried out security incidents in Macomia district, including an attack on a civilian convoy, that resulted in large- scale looting. NSAGs also increased coastal movements in Palma and Mocímboa da Praia, primarily conducting non- violent resupply operations, while carrying out isolated attacks and brief abductions, indicating sustained insurgent mobility and the risk of further military operations . During the same period, 2,830 people—of whom 1,528 were children—were on the move in the northern region of the country. Approximately 93 per cent of these movements were voluntary, with 71 per cent recorded as departures, mainly from Macomia, Pemba and Metuge to Mocímboa da Praia, Macomia, Ibo and other districts. The primary drivers of movement were intention to return (51 per cent), family reunification (29 per cent) and lack of food (9.5 per cent) According to the latest assessment of displacement dynamics (February 2026), across Mozambique, there are 661,532 internally displaced people (IDPs) of whom 54 per cent are children and 721,691 returnees of whom 38 per cent are children. The IDP caseload has increased by nine per cent compared to the previous assessment (April 2025), while the number of returnees has increased by three per cent. Approximately 72 per cent of the displaced people are in Cabo Delgado, largely due to ongoing conflict, while around 14 per cent are located in Sofala Province, primarily due to climate- related shocks. In Cabo Delgado province, the number of IDPs increased by nearly 11 per cent, and the number of returnees increased by nearly three per cent. During the reporting period, Mozambique continued facing the impacts of the severe flooding in Gaza and Sofala provinces. On 13 February tropical cyclone Gezani entered the Mozambique channel and approached the coastal area of Inhambane province, affecting over 9,000 people and causing four deaths. Although the cyclone did not make landfall, strong winds and heavy rains affected 31 health facilities, seven water supply systems, 495 classrooms, impacting over 40,000 children. Overall, as of 28 February 2026, more than 778,000 people were affected by the floods and storms. Damage to social infrastructure included 594 schools (1,661 classrooms), 290 health facilities and 152 education administration buildings, affecting 340,268 students and 10,817 teachers . Mozambique continues to face multiple public health emergencies across the central and northern regions. Measles cases increased by 10 per cent in February 2026, reaching 680 cumulative cases as of 28 February. Cholera cases rose sharply, expanding from 13 to 23 districts, with 2,845 new cases reported—a 74 per cent increase—primarily in Nampula and Tete provinces, and additional cases in Cabo Delgado, Manica and Zambezia. As of 28 February, one measles- related death had been reported, while 17 deaths were attributed to cholera, representing a 29 percent increase since the previous month

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/mozambique/unicef-mozambique-humanitarian-situation-report-no-2-28-february-2026)
