---
layout: feed_item
title: "Pacific Islanders slowly recover from the strongest storm of the year"
date: 2026-05-29 08:45:00 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['emissions', 'tropical-storms', 'oceania', 'climate-migration', 'renewable-energy', 'typhoon', 'extreme-weather', 'displacement', 'wind-power', 'flooding']
keywords: ['emissions', 'pacific', 'oceania', 'tropical-storms', 'climate-migration', 'renewable-energy', 'islanders', 'slowly']
description: "Katelynn Delos Reyes thought she knew what to expect when Typhoon Sinlaku slammed into Saipan last month"
external_url: https://grist.org/indigenous/pacific-islanders-slowly-recover-from-the-strongest-storm-of-the-year/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Grist"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Katelynn Delos Reyes thought she knew what to expect when Typhoon Sinlaku slammed into Saipan last month. As a lifelong resident of the island, Delos Reyes had survived frequent storms, including Supertyphoon Yutu, the second-strongest in U.S. history. Eight years ago, Yutu's 170-mph winds devastated her village in the southern end of Saipan. Just three years before that, she survived Typhoon Soudelor. But Sinlaku was different. 'At the beginning, it was OK. But later on it wasn't,' said Delos Reyes, who is Chamorro, Indigenous to the Mariana Islands. A few days before it hit the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or CNMI, on April 14, Sinlaku had tropical-storm winds. That made it what is known in the Marianas as a 'banana typhoon' because such storms level banana trees but leave others standing. Then over the weekend, the typhoon rapidly intensified by 75 mph in just 24 hours before becoming a 185-mph monstrosity and the strongest storm on Earth so far this year. Delos Reyes and her family had done what they could to prepare. They boarded up the windows. They bought gallons of drinking water and filled plastic drums to use in the shower and toilet. Then the storm hit, and Delos Reyes grew scared. The winds, which had weakened to 150 mph, ripped the wood from a window. Rainwater gushed through the ceiling and soaked their belongings, including Delos Reyes' mattress. She and her partner, her mother, her daughter, and their two dogs hid in her mother's room, where its concrete roof and walls would keep them safe. She heard sections of the roof tumbling away. Eventually, Sinlaku slowed to a crawl, forcing tens of thousands of others to remain sheltered for days. 'How long is this storm going to be with us?' she prayed. 'I think, Lord, maybe it's enough, you can go and finish it elsewhere.' More than a month after Sinlaku tore across the Western Pacific, families in the Northern Mariana Islands and beyond are still grappling with a lack of electricity and clearing debris as they pick up what's left of their homes. Debris litters Garapan, the center of Saipan's tourism district, in late May, more than a month after Sinlaku hit the island. Anita Hofschneider / Grist The region-wide death toll — including Guam and the Federated States of Micronesia — has ticked up to 17, making Sinlaku the deadliest storm in the Micronesian region of the Pacific since 2002. The deaths include a couple on Guam who succumbed to carbon monoxide poisoning while running their generator indoors, as well as six crew members of the cargo ship Mariana, which was caught in the storm when its engine died. In Chuuk State in the Federated States of Micronesia, the storm killed nine people, including a baby whose pregnant mother couldn't reach the hospital due to fallen trees. Other deaths were attributed to a boat capsizing and a tree falling on someone. Strong storms are common in the Micronesian region of the Pacific but rarely this deadly. Shel Winkley, a meteorologist at Climate Central, said Sinlaku's sudden escalation happened over ocean waters 0.6 degrees Celsius warmer than average — temperatures made 70 to 100 times more likely due to climate change, which is caused by the burning of fossil fuels like oil and gas. Scientists have long warned that rising marine temperatures can enable storms like Sinlaku to get stronger faster and hold more moisture, leading to increased flooding. 'In general, climate change is making events like this more intense at their peak intensity,' Winkley said. Sinlaku was named for the Kosraean goddess of breadfruit in the Federated States of Micronesia — a cultural staple also threatened by climate change. A https://www.climatecentral.org map rendering of Category 5 Super Typhoon Sinlaku southeast of Japan in April 2026. FrankRamspott / Getty Images The Pacific is home to many Indigenous peoples who have contributed relatively little to greenhouse gas emissions, yet are already bearing its disastrous effects, ranging from stronger storms to rising seas. Their nations are increasingly calling on major polluters like the U.S. and China to be accountable for their carbon emissions and help bear the cost of the extreme weather wreaking havoc on their communities. The Federated States of Micronesia was among 140 countries last week that voted in favor of a United Nations resolution affirming that state governments have a legal obligation to protect the earth from the harm caused by greenhouse gases, and nations that fail to do so must pay climate reparations. The U.S., which claims sovereignty over the CNMI and Guam, was one of just eight nations that voted against the resolution. The latest available report from emergency officials in Chuuk State, the part of the Federated States of Micronesia hardest hit by the typhoon, estimates that the storm destroyed or severely damaged more than 7,000 homes in Chuuk and Yap and displaced more than 13,000 people. 'Access to safe water is critically compromised, food reserves are depleting rapidly, and the outer islands face growing isolation as maritime supply lines remain constrained,' the report warned. U.N. agencies such as the International Organization for Migration, along with nonprofit organizations and countries like the U.S. and China, have been providing typhoon relief for Chuuk. The growing Micronesian diaspora in the U.S. has also mobilized to send food and money. 'They're going to need financial support to rebuild their houses. They're going to need chainsaws to cut down trees,' Josie Howard, head of the Honolulu-based nonprofit We Are Oceania, told Hawai'i Public Radio. Fallen trees line the road leading up to Marpi in the northern part of Saipan more than a month after Sinlaku devastated the island. Anita Hofschneider / Grist In the Commonwealth of Northern Mariana Islands, officials are still counting the number of homes destroyed and people displaced. But as of last week, piles of debris still littered roadsides, and the entire island of Tinian remained without electricity. Families opened their windows to catch breezes, seeking relief from the humidity and 80-plus degree weather. Indigenous fishermen caught ti'ao, or goatfish, to feed their families fresh dinners in the absence of refrigeration. Residents of Guam bought so many battery-powered Ryobi fans to send their loved ones on more affected islands that the Home Depot ran out. In both the CNMI and Chuuk, children were missing school because their schoolhouses had been severely damaged and, in some cases, destroyed, with many not expected to return for months. On Saipan, people waited an average of two to three hours at the local recovery center to talk to Federal Emergency Management Agency officials about applying for aid. As of last week, more than 9,000 CNMI residents had applied for federal disaster assistance, and the recovery center was serving an average of 300 more each day. 'It's a snake, kind of like the lines at Disneyland,' JD Reyes, a CNMI Commerce Department official who has been managing the recovery center, said of the rows of dozens of waiting families, some of whom had brought their children. The families were from all over the island, Reyes said. 'Soudelor hit the north, and Yutu hit the south,' Reyes said. 'This just hit everyone, and what made it worse is it just sat on top of us for more than 24 hours. So it really made sure, if you're not affected, you will be.' His wife was working at the hospital during the storm, so he stayed home to watch their two-year-old and mop up the water that flooded their house in northern Saipan. Just before dawn, his neighbors ran to his house for shelter because their roof had blown away. 'We actually are very fortunate; we just had our flooding, damage to personal property,' he said. His village went without electricity for more than five weeks. 'But at least we have a roof over our head, no windows destroyed, just damage to the car.' For Delos Reyes and thousands of other residents, recovery remains uncertain. The deadline to apply for FEMA disaster assistance in the CNMI is June 22. Delos Reyes' family in southern Saipan is one of more than 450 families who have so far received emergency tents or temporary roofs. A FEMA tent now sits in her yard, and a tarp partially covers her missing roof. For weeks after the typhoon, Delos Reyes dragged her rain-soaked mattress into the yard to dry slowly in the hot sun. The first thing she and her family did was clear the debris from their driveway so an ambulance could reach her mother in an emergency. Delos Reyes is a caregiver for the 94-year-old woman, who has dementia and has been bedridden for seven years. That's one reason why, no matter how bad each storm gets or how many times she needs to repair her house, Delos Reyes doesn't plan to leave. 'One day at a time,' she said. This story was originally published by Grist with the headline Pacific Islanders slowly recover from the strongest storm of the year on May 29, 2026.

[Read original article](https://grist.org/indigenous/pacific-islanders-slowly-recover-from-the-strongest-storm-of-the-year/)
