---
layout: feed_item
title: "Indonesia: ASEAN Weekly Disaster Update Week 17 | 20 - 26 April 2026"
date: 2026-04-27 12:27:06 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['wind-power', 'urgent', 'renewable-energy', 'cyclone', 'tropical-storms', 'extreme-weather', 'year-2026', 'flooding']
keywords: ['wind-power', 'urgent', 'renewable-energy', 'cyclone', 'weekly', 'indonesia', 'tropical-storms', 'asean']
description: "Countries: Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, Viet Nam Source: ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance Please refer to the attached Infographic"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/indonesia/asean-weekly-disaster-update-week-17-20-26-april-2026
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Countries: Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, Viet Nam Source: ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance Please refer to the attached Infographic. REGIONAL SUMMARY: During the seventeenth week of 2026, a total of 24 disaster events were reported across the ASEAN region, including floods, landslides, storms, and wind-related disasters in Indonesia, Thailand, and Viet Nam. In Indonesia, Badan Nasional Penanggulangan Bencana (BNPB) reported disaster incidents across Jakarta, West Java, East Java, North Sulawesi, and North Sumatra. Meanwhile, in Thailand, Department of Disaster Prevention and Mitigation (DDPM) reported storms and winds in Amnat Charoen, Chachoengsao, Chaiyaphum, Chiang Mai, Chiang Rai, Lampang, Lamphun, Loei, Lopburi, Mae Hong Son, Nakhon Ratchasima, Phayao, Phetchabun, Phitsanulok, Pharae, Saraburi, Singburi, Tak, Udong Thani, and Uttaradit. Lastly, in Viet Nam, Viet Nam Disaster and Dyke Management Authority (VDDMA) reported landslides, storms, and wind-related disasters in Phu Tho, Dien Binh, Lai Chau, Lao Cai, Quang Ninh, and Thanh Hoa. HIGHLIGHT: In Indonesia, heavy rainfall on 21 April at around 1757H UTC+7 affected Pasuruan area, causing Welang River Basin to rise and overflow into residential areas, resulting in flooding. Flooding occurred not only in Pasuruan Regency—particularly in Kraton and Pohjentrek sub-districts—but also in Pasuruan City, especially in Gadingrejo, Panggungrejo, and Purworejo sub-districts. According to BNPB, approximately 1.4K households were affected, along with about 1.4K houses in Pasuruan Regency, while around 100 households and 100 houses were affected in Pasuruan City (data collection is ongoing). Relevant authorities are undertaking necessary response actions, supporting affected communities, and continuing to assess and consolidate impact and damage data. Meanwhile, in Viet Nam, on 23–24 April, heavy rainfall accompanied by thunderstorms and lightning affected Lai Chau, Lao Cai, Quang Ninh, and Thanh Hoa. According to VDDMA, one person died due to a lightning strike; one house collapsed; 191 houses and 7 schools were damaged; and approximately 0.54 hectares of rice fields and vegetables were affected. Local authorities have conducted visits and mobilised response teams to support affected families. HYDRO-METEO-CLIMATOLOGICAL: For the past week, data from the ASEAN Specialised Meteorological Centre (ASMC) indicated medium to high 7-day average rainfall across Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Thailand, Timor-Leste, and Viet Nam. As of this reporting, there is no active tropical cyclone being monitored in the ASEAN region (JTWC). GEOPHYSICAL: Seven (7) significant earthquakes (M>5.0) were recorded by Indonesia's Badan Meteorologi, Klimatologi, dan Geofisika (BMKG) and Myanmar's Department of Meteorology and Hydrology (DMH). Mount Marapi (alert level II), Semeru (alert level III), Lewotobi Laki-laki (alert level II), Ili Lewotolok (alert level II), and Ibu (alert level II) in Indonesia, and Taal (alert level 1), Mayon (alert level 3), Bulusan (alert level 1), and Kanlaon (alert level 2) volcanoes in the Philippines reported recent volcanic activity according to Pusat Vulkanologi dan Mitigasi Bencana Geologi (PVMBG) and the Philippines Institute of Volcanology and Seismology (PHIVOLCS). OUTLOOK: According to the ASEAN Specialised Meteorological Centre (ASMC), for the coming week, wetter conditions are predicted over much of the southern Maritime Continent; drier than usual conditions are predicted over much of central and southern Mainland Southeast Asia and parts of the western Maritime Continent; and warmer than usual temperatures are predicted over much of central and southern Mainland Southeast Asia and most of the northern half of the Maritime Continent. For the regional assessment of extremes, there is a moderate increase in chance of very heavy rainfall over much of northern Myanmar as well as a small increase in chance of very heavy rainfall in the southern Maritime Continent; and there is a moderate chance of extreme hot conditions for much of the Malay Peninsula and surrounding region as well as a small increase in chance of extreme hot conditions over parts of the central and eastern equatorial region. ENSO neutral conditions are now present.

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/indonesia/asean-weekly-disaster-update-week-17-20-26-april-2026)
