---
layout: feed_item
title: "Mobile homes already have huge utility bills. Congress may make it worse."
date: 2026-01-09 17:20:59 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['renewable-energy', 'year-2026', 'clean-energy']
keywords: ['homes', 'clean-energy', 'already', 'renewable-energy', 'year-2026', 'mobile']
description: "On Friday morning, the U.S. House of Representatives approved a bill that would get the Department of Energy out of the business of energy standards for mobi..."
external_url: https://grist.org/energy/mobile-homes-already-have-huge-utility-bills-congress-may-make-it-worse/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Grist"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

On Friday morning, the U.S. House of Representatives approved a bill that would get the Department of Energy out of the business of energy standards for mobile homes — also known as manufactured homes — and could set the efficiency requirements back decades.&nbsp; Advocates say the changes will streamline the regulatory process and keep the upfront costs of manufactured homes down. Critics argue that less efficient homes will cost people more money overall, and mostly benefit builders.&nbsp;&nbsp; &#8220;This is not about poor people. This is not about working people,&#8221; said Melanie Stansbury (D-NM), who grew up in a manufactured home, on the House floor before the vote. &#8220;This is about doing the bidding of corporations.&#8221; The average income of a manufactured home resident is around $40,000 and they “already face disproportionately high energy costs and energy use,” said Johanna Neumann, senior director of the Campaign for 100% Renewable Energy at Environment America. That, she said, is why more stringent energy codes are so important. But the Energy Department, which oversees national energy policy and production, didn’t always have a say over these standards.&nbsp; Starting in 1974, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, or HUD, became tasked with setting building codes for manufactured homes. But HUD last updated the relevant energy efficiency standards in 1994, and they have long lagged behind modern insulation and weatherization practices. So, in 2007, Congress assigned that task to the Department of Energy. It still took 15 years and a lawsuit before President Joe Biden’s administration finalized new rules in 2022 that were projected to reduce utility bills in double-wide manufactured homes by an average of $475 a year. Even with higher upfront costs taken into account, the government predicted around $5 billion in avoided energy bills over 30-years. At the time, the manufactured housing industry argued that DoE’s calculations were wrong and that, regardless, the upfront cost of the home should be the primary metric of affordability. Both the Biden and now Trump administrations have delayed implementation of the rule and compliance deadlines, which still aren’t in effect.&nbsp; Read Next Why forcing people to go green can backfire Tik Root This House legislation would eliminate the DoE rule and return sole regulatory authority to HUD. Lesli Gooch, CEO of the Manufactured Housing Institute, a trade organization, describes it as essentially a process bill aimed at removing bureaucracy that has stood in the way of action. “The paralysis is because you have two different agencies that have been tasked with creating energy standards,” Gooch said. “You can&#8217;t build a house to two different sets of blueprints.” Jake Auchincloss, a democrat from Massachusetts, agreed and called the move “common-sense regulatory reform” in a letter urging his colleagues to support the bill. Ultimately 57 democrats joined 206 republicans in voting for the bill — and it now moves to the Senate, where its prospects are uncertain.&nbsp; If the bill becomes law, however, the only operative benchmark would be HUD’s 1994 code and it could take years to make a new one. While more than half of the roughly 100,000 homes sold in the U.S. each year already meet or exceed the DoE’s 2022 efficiency rules, ACEEE estimates that tens of thousands are still built to just the outdated standard.&nbsp; “Families are struggling,” said Mark Kresowik, senior policy director at the nonprofit American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy, and he does not expect HUD, under Trump, to move particularly quickly on a fix. “I have not seen this administration lowering energy bills.” For now, though, it’s the Senate’s turn to weigh in. This story was originally published by Grist with the headline Mobile homes already have huge utility bills. Congress may make it worse. on Jan 9, 2026.

[Read original article](https://grist.org/energy/mobile-homes-already-have-huge-utility-bills-congress-may-make-it-worse/)
