---
layout: feed_item
title: "Nigel Farage Has Personally Accepted £675,000 from Foreign Sources"
date: 2026-04-18 16:40:29 +0000
categories: [media]
tags: ['climate-communication', 'year-2024', 'urgent', 'media-coverage']
keywords: ['personally', 'climate-communication', 'farage', 'year-2024', 'nigel', 'urgent', 'media-coverage']
description: "Of Farage's 28 benefactors, 20 are based abroad (71 percent)"
external_url: https://www.desmog.com/2026/04/18/nigel-farage-income-foreign-donors-governments-companies/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "DeSmog"
feed_category: "media"
---

Reform UK leader Nigel Farage has accepted more than half a million pounds from foreign companies, governments, and donors while serving as an MP, DeSmog can reveal. Since July 2024, when he was elected as the Member of Parliament for Clacton, Farage has received almost £2 million in income and gifts, with £675,000 coming from foreign sources. Of Farage's 28 benefactors, 20 are based abroad (71 percent). This comes amid growing scrutiny of the foreign influences on British democracy following attempts by the Labour government to clamp down on overseas donations to UK political parties. Farage's largest foreign income stream has been Cameo – the U.S. platform where celebrities record videos for money – earning £222,000 on the site since being elected to Parliament. Farage has now deleted his profile on the platform after a Guardian investigation found he had sold Cameo videos repeating extremist slogans and endorsing a neo-Nazi event. This income has been received on top of Farage's £94,000 a year public salary. Labour's chair Anna Turley said: 'Nigel Farage rarely turns up to do his actual job. Yet he finds time to jet off around the world on his donor's private plane and trouser half a million quid while families struggle. Reform are not on your side. They're just in it for themselves.' A version of this article was published by The Mirror. The Reform leader has also been paid for a range of foreign speaking events, including £40,000 to address Nomad Capitalist Live in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, in September 2024. Nomad Capitalist, which is based in Hong Kong, advises the super rich on how to cut their tax bills. Farage has also received gifts from foreign governments. As revealed by DeSmog, the Abu Dhabi government provided tickets and hospitality worth £10,000 for Farage to attend the local Formula One Grand Prix in December. 'At a time when trust in politics is at rock bottom, the public deserves absolute confidence that their MPs are working solely in service of their constituents and their country, not dancing to the tune of foreign interests,' said Kamila Kingstone, senior campaign lead at Spotlight on Corruption. 'Cases like this make it painfully clear that transparency alone is not enough and that the current system leaves far too much room for foreign influence. The government urgently needs to impose tougher limits on MPs' second jobs and on the gifts and payments they are allowed to accept, so that public service cannot be overshadowed by private gain.' Subscribe to our newsletter Stay up to date with DeSmog news and alerts Name --> Email Address What content do you want to subscribe to? (check all that apply) All International UK Sign Up Despite claiming to represent working-class voters, Farage – the UK's highest-paid MP – has also received private jet trips worth £85,000 from major Reform donor Christopher Harborne. A billionaire cryptocurrency investor, Harborne is based in Thailand, where he has lived for over 20 years. Farage is a major backer of cryptocurrencies, and has £215,000 invested in a UK Bitcoin treasury, Stack BTC – owned by Paul Withers, who runs the gold exchange Direct Bullion, which has paid Farage more than £500,000 since he became an MP. Farage's Stack BTC shares have reportedly doubled in value since he bought them, largely due to the fanfare around his investment. Harborne is Reform's biggest donor, having given £12 million to the party last year and more than £22 million since 2019. However, his contributions to the party are now in jeopardy after Labour introduced new rules that cap donations from overseas residents to £100,000 a year. Earlier this month, crypto entrepreneur and right-wing philanthropist Ben Delo said he had given £4 million to Reform and would be moving back to the UK in order to circumvent the government's new donation rules. 'Farage is bought and paid for by vested interests,' Green Party deputy leader Rachel Millward said. 'Clearly, his disdain for foreign people does not extend to those who want to give him money to advance his hateful agenda. He loves open borders when it comes to cash!' Reform UK is the UK's leading anti-climate party, with several of its senior figures – including Farage – denying basic climate science. The Reform leader has claimed it's 'absolutely nuts' for CO2 to be considered a pollutant, while his deputy Richard Tice has called it 'plant food'. Of the £1.3 million earned by Farage from UK sources, a number are closely connected to overseas interests. GB News, Farage's largest single source of income, is co-owned by the Legatum Group – a Dubai-based investment vehicle – and hedge fund manager Paul Marshall, whose firm is 40 percent owned by U.S. private equity giant KKR. Reform and Farage were approached for comment. Foreign Influences on Farage Reform has close connections to a number of foreign regimes and influential overseas interests. Farage is one of U.S. President Donald Trump's most vocal European allies, having repeatedly campaigned for his election – including in 2016, when Farage was the first foreign politician to be given an audience with Trump following his presidential victory. Farage is also well connected in Trump's MAGA movement. 'He's seen as the elder statesman. He almost has senator status. If England were the 51st state, Nigel Farage would be one of the senators,' one of his longstanding friends, Raheem Kassam, told the New Statesman in December. As documented by DeSmog, Farage has been helping the Heartland Institute – an influential pro-Trump climate science denial group – to extend its influence in the UK and Europe. The Heartland Institute was one of the groups behind Project 2025 – the authoritarian blueprint for Trump's second term, convened by the Heritage Foundation. According to The Spectator, key people from Project 2025 'have been shuttling between London and Washington' to give their advice to Farage. And the Reform leader has earned thousands from MAGA events since he became an MP. In the past year, Farage has been paid more than £11,000 to speak at Hillsdale College – a conservative university in Michigan – and nearly £28,000 to speak at the 'Club for Growth', a lobby group that has endorsed and campaigned for Trump. Farage has also racked up donor-funded flights worth at least £150,000 to speak at pro-Trump events since he was elected to Parliament, and has received £47,000 from Trump-donating U.S. tech giants X Corp, Google, and Meta. But Trump's America is not the only foreign regime with financial ties to Farage and his party. In addition to the F1 hospitality given to Farage by the Abu Dhabi government in December, other senior figures in Reform are in business with the United Arab Emirates (UAE). Reform UK leader Nigel Farage at the Formula 1 Grand Prix in Abu Dhabi, December 2025. Credit: Nigel Farage / X In October 2024, the party's treasurer Nick Candy entered into a 'strategic joint venture partnership' with Modon Holding – a real estate company owned by the Abu Dhabi government – via his firm Candy Capital. He has also partnered with the state-owned Dubai World Trade Centre to develop 'super-prime' properties on the site. Meanwhile, Reform's Nadhim Zahawi – a former Tory minister who defected to Farage's party in January – is a senior figure at Omniyat, a luxury property developer in Dubai. Farage convened a group of prospective patrons in Dubai earlier this year in an attempt to convince them to donate to the party. As a result, campaigners are urging the government to close the political finance loopholes that allow foreign regimes and big money interests to shape UK policy. 'An MP's only real job should be representing their constituents,' said Tom Brake, director of the campaign group Unlock Democracy. 'Yet sadly, for some MPs, supplementing their own income appears to have greater appeal. 'This is bad enough, but what is even more concerning is when MPs receive income from foreign sources, particularly foreign governments or organisations closely aligned with them. These financial relationships always risk giving undue influence and leverage to foreign entities, which UK legislators should avoid at all costs.' In March, the Rycroft Review was released, a government report from former Foreign Office permanent secretary Philip Rycroft, which summarised the threats to British democracy from overseas actors. 'This country faces a persistent problem of foreign interests seeking to exert influence on, and to interfere in, our politics,' Rycroft said. 'Too much of this is malign and seeks to sow distrust and exacerbate divisions in UK society, with the ultimate aim of undermining confidence in our democracy… If government does not act swiftly to gear up to counter these threats, there is a real risk they will run away from us.' The post Nigel Farage Has Personally Accepted £675,000 from Foreign Sources appeared first on DeSmog.

[Read original article](https://www.desmog.com/2026/04/18/nigel-farage-income-foreign-donors-governments-companies/)
