---
layout: feed_item
title: "Attacks on Health Care in Myanmar: 01-14 April 2026"
date: 2026-04-24 08:46:01 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['public-health', 'urgent', 'climate-health', 'year-2026']
keywords: ['care', 'health', 'public-health', 'urgent', 'climate-health', 'attacks', 'year-2026']
description: "Country: Myanmar Source: Insecurity Insight Please refer to the attached file"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/myanmar/attacks-health-care-myanmar-01-14-april-2026
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: Myanmar Source: Insecurity Insight Please refer to the attached file. Attacks on Health Care in Myanmar Insecurity Insight identified at least 1911 incidents of violence against or obstruction of health care in Myanmar since the military coup on 01 February 2021 and 30 March 2026. Over 70% of these incidents were attributed to the Myanmar Armed Forces (MAF) and Myanmar police. Health facilities were reportedly damaged or destroyed 493 times, 174 health workers were killed and 909 arrested. Since 2024, makeshift health facilities have been damaged or destroyed by MAF aircraft, drone, and artillery strikes on 27 occasions, nearly half of which occurred in Sagaing region. Over a quarter of these 27 incidents were recorded between January and March 2026. In one incident on 30 March, a makeshift hospital in Sagaing's Monywa district, providing care to around 50 patients, was destroyed by bombs dropped by two Myanmar military fighter jets in the afternoon. At least seven people were killed, including three patients, and 20 were injured. The facility had been operated for two years by health workers affiliated with the civil disobedience movement, with support from the exiled government. View the incidents on our interactive map. Download the data. Updated every Monday and includes information on weapons use, perpetrators and effects. For events descriptions and data enquiries, please get in touch. Numbers may change if or when further information is made available. See here for methodology. The publicly reported incidents below are not a complete nor a representative list of all incidents that affected the provision of health care in Myanmar between 01-14 April 2026. The incidents have not been verified through ground investigations. There is a delay in reporting incidents due to our open source verification protocol. 02 April 2026: In Nyaung Pin Thar village, Monywa township, Monywa district, Sagaing region, a makeshift hospital and at least eight houses were damaged by at least 12 bombs dropped from six Myanmar military fighter jets. The hospital buildings, including an operation theatre, and equipment were damaged. Since early 2022, the hospital has been operated by CDM-affiliated health workers and with the support of the exiled government. Sources: Democratic Voice of Burma, Khit Thit Media, Mandalay Free Press and Myaelatt Athan As reported on 06 April 2026: At the airport in Sittwe town, township and district, Rakhine state, medicines were reportedly confiscated from air travellers by the junta police. One- or two-month supplies of medicine items for personal use were also confiscated. There has been a shortage of medicine in Sittwe since the armed clashes started in this area. Source: Western News Agency As reported on 06 April 2026: In Tigyaing town, Tigyaing township, Katha district, Sagaing region, a traditional medicine hospital was occupied by the Myanmar military. Source: Kachin News Group 11 April 2026: In Au Mi Hta village, Bu Tho township, Hpapun district, Kayin state, two buildings of a local hospital - funded by some aid organisations - were damaged by two bombs dropped by a Myanmar military fighter jet. One of the buildings was newly built as an outpatient department. Sources: Karen Peace Support Network, Khit Thit Media, and Salween Press 12 April 2026: In Ywar Thit village, Myingyan township, Myingyan district, Mandalay region, a makeshift hospital was damaged by a drop-bomb attack by the Myanmar military, using armed drones. On the same day, the hospital building and almost all other houses in the village were torched by the Myanmar military**. Source:** Khit Thit Media

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/myanmar/attacks-health-care-myanmar-01-14-april-2026)
