---
layout: feed_item
title: "San Francisco's Metropolitan Mosaic"
date: 2026-06-09 04:00:00 +0000
categories: [climate_science]
tags: ['wind-power', 'renewable-energy', 'urgent', 'year-2026', 'california', 'usa']
keywords: ['wind-power', 'mosaic', 'renewable-energy', 'urgent', 'year-2026', 'francisco', 'california', 'metropolitan']
description: "The image captures two of the region's iconic bridges"
external_url: https://science.nasa.gov/missions/station/san-franciscos-metropolitan-mosaic/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "NASA Science"
feed_category: "climate_science"
---

Earth ObservatoryScienceInternational Space Station (ISS)San Francisco's Metropolitan…EarthEarth ObservatoryImage of the DayEO ExplorerTopicsAll TopicsAtmosphereLandHeat & RadiationLife on EarthHuman DimensionsNatural EventsOceansRemote Sensing TechnologySnow & IceWaterMore ContentCollectionsGlobal MapsWorld of ChangeArticlesEarth Matters BlogBlue Marble: Next GenerationEO KidsMission: BiomesAboutAbout UsSubscribe🛜 RSSContact UsSearch May 27, 2026 A period of unsettled weather brought scattered showers and thunderstorms to California's Bay Area on May 27, 2026. That afternoon, a break in the clouds left downtown San Francisco and nearby communities beneath mostly cloud-free skies, allowing an astronaut aboard the International Space Station to take this photograph. The image captures two of the region's iconic bridges. The Golden Gate Bridge connects the northern San Francisco Peninsula with Marin County to the north, while the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge spans the bay toward Oakland to the east. Near the center of the image, Golden Gate Park stands out as a long, rectangular strip of green amid the dense urban landscape. Spanning more than 1,000 acres (400 hectares), the park encompasses meadows, gardens, wooded areas, and lakes. Additional green space toward the north around the Golden Gate Bridge is part of a national recreation area. The nadir (downward-looking) perspective also provides a clear view of the patchwork of street grids, which were laid out over San Francisco's hilly terrain as the city grew in successive stages. In the heart of the downtown area, Market Street runs southwest to northeast and serves as a prominent divider between two distinct grid orientations: one aligned with the bay and the other aligned with the street. Along the northeastern and eastern waterfront, various structures extend into the bay. Toward the north, these include a historic wharf, seawalls, and piers—most built in the early 1900s, though some date back into the 1800s. The adjacent waters support heavy maritime traffic, including cargo and container ships, cruise vessels, and regional ferries. Breaking waves are visible along the western coast, including at Ocean Beach, the 3.5-mile stretch of sandy shore adjacent to Golden Gate Park. On May 27, the National Weather Service warned of hazardous conditions at the region's beaches due to strong northerly winds. Long-period swells from the northwest contributed to the increased risk of rip currents as well as sneaker waves in the days after this image was acquired. Astronaut photograph ISS074-E-619284 was acquired on May 27, 2026, with a Nikon Z9 digital camera using a focal length of 800 millimeters. It is provided by the ISS Crew Earth Observations Facility and the Earth Science and Remote Sensing Unit at NASA Johnson Space Center. The image was taken by a member of the Expedition 74 crew. The image has been cropped and enhanced to improve contrast, and lens artifacts have been removed. The International Space Station Program supports the laboratory as part of the ISS National Lab to help astronauts take pictures of Earth that will be of the greatest value to scientists and the public, and to make those images freely available on the Internet. Additional images taken by astronauts and cosmonauts can be viewed at the NASA/JSC Gateway to Astronaut Photography of Earth. Story by Kathryn Hansen. Downloads May 27, 2026 JPEG (12.13 MB) References & Resources California State Parks, Port of San Francisco Embarcadero Historic District. Accessed June 8, 2026. National Park Service, Golden Gate National Recreation Area. Accessed June 8, 2026. NWS Bay Area via X (2026, May 27) Heading to the beach tomorrow? Accessed June 8, 2026. NWS Bay Area via X (2026, May 27) Radar Update: Showers with brief downpours and some isolated thunderstorms are winding down. Accessed June 8, 2026. NWS Bay Area via X (2026, May 26) The ocean is not your friend today and tomorrow! Accessed June 8, 2026. San Francisco Recreation & Parks, Discover Golden Gate Park. Accessed June 8, 2026. You may also be interested in: Stay up-to-date with the latest content from NASA as we explore the universe and discover more about our home planet. Belts of Green in the Washington Suburbs 3 min read Along the northeast side of the Capital Beltway in Maryland, green spaces weave through the developed landscape. Article Contours of the James Bay Lowlands 3 min read After the Laurentide Ice Sheet retreated from present-day Hudson Bay, rebounding land has revealed striking nearshore topography. Article Great Balls of Fire 4 min read An astronaut on the International Space Station was surprised to photograph a shower of light streaking through the darkness while… Article 1 2 3 4 Next Keep Exploring Discover More from NASA Earth Science Subscribe to Earth Observatory Newsletters Subscribe to the Earth Observatory and get the Earth in your inbox. Earth Observatory Image of the Day NASA's Earth Observatory brings you the Earth, every day, with in-depth stories and stunning imagery. Explore Earth Science Earth Science Data Open access to NASA's archive of Earth science data The post San Francisco's Metropolitan Mosaic appeared first on NASA Science.

[Read original article](https://science.nasa.gov/missions/station/san-franciscos-metropolitan-mosaic/)
