---
layout: feed_item
title: "Somalia: Radio Ergo Weekly Feedback Report, Issued: 12 June 2026"
date: 2026-06-13 20:45:12 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['food-security', 'drought', 'water-crisis', 'climate-health', 'year-2026', 'urgent', 'extreme-weather', 'flooding', 'agriculture', 'public-health']
keywords: ['food-security', 'drought', 'radio', 'water-crisis', 'climate-health', 'year-2026', 'somalia', 'ergo']
description: "Country: Somalia Source: Radio Ergo Please refer to the attached file"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/radio-ergo-weekly-feedback-report-issued-12-june-2026
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: Somalia Source: Radio Ergo Please refer to the attached file. Brief Analysis The calls to Radio Ergo's nationwide audience feedback platform in the week 4-10 June 2026 indicated a continuing mixed picture of rainfall in some areas with drought and water shortage in others. Many callers pointed out the uneven pattern of the rain. Whilst more callers spoke of rainfall and their optimism for recovery, this week recorded an increase in others citing the stresses caused by drought, including loss of livestock and failing crops. The following summarises the calls by theme. IDPs – a caller in Baidoa, Bay region, said they were IDPs living in a camp without proper shelter and with no assistance from aid organisations. Another caller in Dollow, Gedo region, said he was among IDPs facing hardship in the camps. He added that they had lost their livestock to drought and were appealing for help. Health – a female caller in Bardera, Gedo region, said there were outbreaks of malaria and flu spreading in the area. Another in Luq wanted medical advice about her sick, malnourished daughter who was unable to eat. Currency – several callers in Bay and Gedo regions complained about the loss of the Somali shilling that is affecting trade and small business. A female caller in Bardera said they wanted the government to restore the notes as they didn't know how to use mobile money. Aid – a caller in Marawade, Sanag region, said he wanted WFP to verify the identities of the aid workers distributing aid there. Food security – a female caller in Yufle, Sanag, there was unemployment and poverty in the area and they needed help to cope with the hardship. Migration – a caller in Bali-dhiig, Togdher, commented that overseas migration was putting the youth at risk and they needed to sensitised about the dangers. He also wanted to see the human traffickers brought before the law. Environment – a caller in Beletweyne, Hiran, spoke about the conflict between people cutting down trees to make a living from firewood sales, and others being put at risk of losing the necessary vegetation cover. He wondered if there was a solution to this. Agriculture – a caller in Harardere in Mudug said he was among the farmers dependent on rain water for their farms. He cited pests attacking their crops, making the plants dry and darken. He wanted the agriculture expert to tell them how to control the pests. A farmer in Bardera said his were growing well although the tomatoes were not producing fruits and the gourds remained white. Callers in various regions had complaints about pests or disease including aphids, moths, caterpillars and mould, affecting vegetable and fruit crops. They all sought advice from the radio farming experts. Livestock – among callers to the Radio Vet programme, a caller in El-baraf, Middle Shabelle, wanted help with sick camels suffering from swollen, infected udders. A caller in Bardera appreciated the livestock programme and the experts. He also urged people to plant grass in the current rainy season to benefit the livestock as fodder in the dry season. Drought & Water shortage – a caller in Bogle village, north of Burao in Togdher region, said they were facing drought conditions in the area. Two female callers from parts of Sanag region cited drought conditions, water shortage, feeble livestock, and the need for help. Another in Bosaso, Bari region, said they need help to cope with the drought. A caller in Mudug said some parts of the region had rainfall while others were seeing drought and livestock deaths. In Galgadud region, callers in Adado and Abudwak spoke of water shortage. A caller in Galmegag said they faced drought and intense heat, their livestock were feeble, and they had missed out on rainfall for the past two seasons. A caller in Guriel said they had only 50 goats left from their herd of more than 100 due to drought. He added that they needed boreholes drilled in the area. A female caller said they had neither fodder nor water for their livestock. In Middle Shabelle, a farmer in Bananey said they had planted their crops but the rain had been poor. Two female callers in Wanleweyn, Lower Shabelle, said their crops were failing due to lack of rainfall and they faced drought and water shortage. Callers in Bardera, Dollow, and Kismayo cited early cessation of rainfall and rising temperatures with drought conditions. Rain – callers in scattered parts of the north including Awdal, Togdher, and Sool spoke of receiving rainfall that was replenishing resources and aiding recovery. Callers across various parts of Nugal and Galmudug regions also cited rainfall, with one in Borey, Mudug, saying they were doing well and hoped other areas also would get rainfall. Several in Hiran region mentioned rain, having also had floods before, although some of these callers indicated that the rain was little. Similarly, callers in Middle Shabelle indicated that there was rain in some areas but not others. Two female callers in Baidoa spoke of heavy rainfall and the sale of their farm produce to Mogadishu markets making a decent income. Several in various locations in Gedo region said they had rain, and their livestock and crops were doing well. One in El-ade said whilst their livestock were regaining their strength, they were concerned by the inflation of prices.

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/radio-ergo-weekly-feedback-report-issued-12-june-2026)
