---
layout: feed_item
title: "Federated States of Micronesia CDEOC Situation Report No. 7 - Tropical Storm Sinlaku (Chuuk State - April 25, 2026)"
date: 2026-04-26 06:12:53 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['wind-power', 'climate-costs', 'pacific-region', 'tropical-storms', 'oceania', 'renewable-energy', 'urgent', 'year-2026', 'economic-impacts', 'typhoon']
keywords: ['wind-power', 'climate-costs', 'federated', 'pacific-region', 'tropical-storms', 'oceania', 'micronesia', 'states']
description: "Country: Micronesia (Federated States of) Source: Government of the Federated States of Micronesia Please refer to the attached file"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/micronesia-federated-states/federated-states-micronesia-cdeoc-situation-report-no-7-tropical-storm-sinlaku-chuuk-state-april-25-2026
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: Micronesia (Federated States of) Source: Government of the Federated States of Micronesia Please refer to the attached file. From 9-12 of April, Chuuk State was battered by Cat 5 Super Typhoon Sinlaku as it moved NW across the Pacific in the direction of the Northern Mariana Islands. It reached a wind speed of up to 177 mph on April 13, 2026, at 4:00 am local time near Weno and was 113 miles in diameter at the time. According to the internationally accepted Saffir-Simpson classification, this corresponded to a category 5 typhoon. The storm wrought havoc in its path destroying crops and infrastructure, namely homes, water systems and schools. The larger islands are highly vulnerable to shocks, and for the smaller and more remote, the situation is even more extreme. Already fragile life-support systems have been decimated in many areas, and severe damage has been experienced by all. Transportation, critical in a large and spread-out sea state, is extremely costly and has been exacerbated by the global energy crisis. Infrastructure in Weno, the state capital, has been damaged, limiting coordination and response capacity. A state of emergency was declared by Chuuk State on 12 April and by the National Government on 13 April. In light of the severity, a request for international assistance was issued by the Government of FSM triggering both US Disaster Assistance and wider international support. HIGHLIGHTS The Government of FSM made an official request for international assistance to the UN Resident Coordinator requesting support for food insecurity, water and information management support. The US released 250,000 to DECEM on behalf of Chuuk State and USD 500,000 was granted to IOM. Under the CoFA, the US will lead on the full reconstruction program on the basis of a Joint Disaster Assessment (JDA) which will build on the IDA. Reverse Osmosis and Jerry Cans prioritized for emergency response. Fuel situation is stabilised for both Jet and Regular - pricing however remains of concern with government intervention unlikely to cover the entirety of cost increase. Analysis: Catastrophic damage to life support systems has taken place - food, water, shelter - particularly on remote islands, compounded by the global cost of living crisis Significant emergency efforts are ongoing to reconnect islands and deliver essential supplies. Degraded port and wharf infrastructure risks threaten future livelihood and economic activity Damaged commercial vessels in Weno port bring risk of oil pollution if fuel tanks are breached.; Vast distances between islands make transportation extremely costly particularly in terms of fuel, Chuuk State is extremely vulnerable. The global energy crisis impacts immeasurably on the response - with increased fuel costs to be felt by both responders and affected populations. Priorities: Ensure continuity of emergency provision of food and water based on identified requirements. Reinforce WASH capacity through reverse osmosis and rain catchment system repair. Ensure the functioning of services and utilities. Ensure access to fuel for both affected populations and emergency responders.

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/micronesia-federated-states/federated-states-micronesia-cdeoc-situation-report-no-7-tropical-storm-sinlaku-chuuk-state-april-25-2026)
