---
layout: feed_item
title: "New loss and damage fund could run out of money next year"
date: 2026-04-24 15:23:49 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['hurricane', 'emissions', 'flooding', 'year-2027', 'fossil-fuels', 'extreme-weather', 'tropical-storms']
keywords: ['hurricane', 'loss', 'fund', 'emissions', 'year-2027', 'fossil-fuels', 'flooding', 'damage']
description: "Despite not yet paying out any money, a UN-backed fund meant to address the loss and damage caused to developing countries by climate change could face 'liqu..."
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/04/24/new-loss-and-damage-fund-could-run-out-of-money-next-year/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Despite not yet paying out any money, a UN-backed fund meant to address the loss and damage caused to developing countries by climate change could face 'liquidity issues' by the end of next year, its head warned today. With ten projects already requesting $166 million in total, the fund's Executive Director Ibrahima Cheikh Diong warned a board meeting in Zambia that the fund was likely to be 'oversubscribed' and should anticipate cashflow problems. A framing paper prepared by the fund's secretariat similarly warns that 'given the current status of the capitalization of the Fund, there is a risk of the Fund exhausting its capital by the end of 2027, which could result in a loss of operational momentum and expose the FRLD to reputational risk'. Since governments agreed to set up the fund at UN climate talks in Egypt in 2022, wealthy nations have promised $822 million, but delivered just $449 million. The fund is expected to approve its first projects at its next board meeting in July. Early proposals submitted include strengthening responses to floods in Bangladesh and the Nigerian city of Lagos, and improving water infrastructure in Jamaica following Hurricane Melissa last year. A woman walks over debris, outside a store where food is being distributed, after Hurricane Melissa made landfall in Black River, Jamaica, October 30, 2025. (REUTERS/Octavio Jones ) Millions not billions ActionAid Zambia climate justice coordinator Michael Mwansa told the board meeting that he was concerned about 'the failure of the Global North governments to deliver on their climate finance obligations, making it largely impossible to scale up [the fund's initial stage] significantly, if at all'. 'Pledges remain nowhere near the billions and even the trillions needed to address loss and damage to the Global South', Mwansa added, highlighting reports which found that financing loss and damage could cost developing countries up to $400 billion a year. The fund's board discussed its strategy for raising more money at its meeting this week while climate campaigners called, in an open letter, for it to aim to secure $50 billion a year from developed countries starting next year, rising to $100 billion a year by 2031 and $400 billion by 2035. The World Bank-hosted fund aims to have revenue-raising rounds known as replenishments every four years, with the first in 2027. Governments have agreed to 'urge' developed countries to contribute but only to 'encourage' other nations to do so and the fund's secretariat wants to appoint a 'high-level champion' to lead the replenishment team. The fundraising strategy will be discussed further at the next board meeting in the Philipines in June. Campaigners' open letter calls for developed countries to contribute more and for them to introduce taxes on fossil fuel companies, financial transactions, luxury air travel and wealth to raise money for the fund. 'Rich countries must be held strictly accountable for the devastation they have caused,' said Climate Action Network International head Tasneem Essop. 'Their failure to fulfil their responsibility to the Loss and Damage Fund is not just an oversight; it is a shameful betrayal of humanity.' The post New loss and damage fund could run out of money next year appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/04/24/new-loss-and-damage-fund-could-run-out-of-money-next-year/)
