---
layout: feed_item
title: "Lebanon: Flash Update #32 - Escalation of hostilities in Lebanon (as of 4 June 2026)"
date: 2026-06-07 06:47:08 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['agriculture', 'year-2026', 'food-security', 'urgent', 'climate-health', 'economic-impacts', 'climate-costs', 'public-health']
keywords: ['agriculture', 'year-2026', 'flash', 'urgent', 'food-security', 'climate-health', 'update', 'lebanon']
description: "Country: Lebanon Source: UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Please refer to the attached file"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/lebanon/lebanon-flash-update-32-escalation-hostilities-lebanon-4-june-2026
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: Lebanon Source: UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Please refer to the attached file. HIGHLIGHTS Revised Flash Appeal jointly launched by the United Nations and Government of Lebanon on 5 June, calling for US$ 639.9 million to assist 1.4 million people through August 2026. Hostilities continued with airstrikes and six new displacement orders covering 14 localities across the South and Nabatieh governorates triggering additional displacements. At least 3,526 deaths and 10,733 injuries due to hostilities recorded by the Ministry of Public Health since 2 March. 196 attacks on healthcare recorded by WHO since 2 March, resulting in 131 deaths and 379 injuries among on-duty healthcare workers. Over 12.4 million hot and cold meals distributed by Food Security and Agriculture sector partners since 2 March. 652 vulnerable families have received cash-based assistance of $250 from Shelter Sector partners to cover shelter-related costs since 15 May. Pipeline and service breaks due to funding gaps expected from 1 July in WASH, Health and Food Security and Agriculture sectors. SITUATION OVERVIEW Despite the new ceasefire announcement jointly issued by Lebanon, Israel and the United States on 3 June, the situation remained volatile during the reporting period as Hezbollah rejected the ceasefire's terms. Hostilities continued unabated, spurring new population movements and mounting humanitarian needs. At least six displacement orders were issued or renewed by the Israeli Army for parts of South and Nabatieh Governorates, including calls for the entire civilian population to move north of the Zahrani River, triggering additional population movements and placing increased pressure on already overstretched shelters and host communities. As 4 June 135,300 people – or around 35,500 families – were registered in 636 increasingly-overcrowded collective shelters, with thousands more families sheltering in open spaces. Collective shelters in Tyre and Saida in South governorate were reportedly full. According to the Ministry of Public Health (MoPH), at least 3,526 people have been killed (including 339 women and 245 children) and 10,733 injured (including 1,337 women and 957 children) due to hostilities since 2 March 2026. UNIFIL, the UN peacekeeping operations in southern Lebanon, reported the death of a peacekeeper and two injuries occurred on 4 June in Marjaayoun, when their position came under shelling. Seven UN peacekeepers have been killed in Lebanon since 2 March. Threats and attacks against healthcare continued to be reported: at least 196 attacks affecting healthcare have been recorded, and 131 on-duty healthcare workers killed and 379 injured, between 2 March and 4 June 2026. An attack on 2 June near Tebnine Governmental Hospital in Nabatieh Governorate – the only operational health facility in Bint Jbeil district and a critical hub for trauma care in southern Lebanon – wounded 11 people, including a doctor and five hospital staff, and caused damage to the facility. This incident constitutes the fourth impacting the hospital since the escalation of hostilities on 2 March, raising grave concerns over the protection of health care professionals and services. On 3 June and in response to an allegation posted by the IDF, Tebnine Hospital's administration issued a statement defending its continuous provision of healthcare and medical services throughout the conflict, despite the challenges and risks faced by its medical, nursing, administrative and support staff. According to the hospital's statement, more than 70 nursing, administrative and support staff and 10 doctors have continued to perform their duties and provide care within the hospital, supported by an ICRC team. Protection risks affecting the civilian population remain significant. Displaced families shared their feelings of heightened psychosocial stress during visits, particularly among children exposed to recurrent displacement. Risks related to unexploded ordnance (UXO) and movement in previously affected areas continue to pose threats, limiting safe return and access to agricultural land. Overall, the situation continues to be characterized by persistent fragility, with humanitarian needs outpacing available resources. Pipeline and service breaks due to funding gaps are expected in the WASH, Health, and Food Security and Agriculture sectors from 1 July. Economic conditions continue to deteriorate, further exacerbating vulnerabilities. Communities reported rising prices of rent and essential goods, increasing reliance on humanitarian assistance. On 5 June 2026, the revised Flash Appeal was jointly launched by the Humanitarian Coordinator for Lebanon and the Minister of Social Affairs (the Government's lead on coordination of and response to the humanitarian crisis resulting from the escalation of hostilities), under the patronage of the Lebanese Prime Minister. The revised appeal seeks an additional US$ 331.5 million to sustain and expand multi-sector assistance for up to 1.4 million people in need through the end of August 2026. The revised appeal reflects the growing scale and severity of humanitarian needs and brings the total funding requirement for the six months' response from March through August 2026 to US$ 639.9 million. At the time of its publication, the revised Flash Appeal was 29 per cent funded, with $190 million in contributions reported to date. At the launch event, Humanitarian Coordinator Imran Riza called for de-escalation, respect for International Humanitarian Law, unhindered humanitarian access, and scaled-up funding,noting that 'the people of Lebanon have developed a remarkable strength to withstand the hardest of times, but even this exceptional resilience has its limits.'

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/lebanon/lebanon-flash-update-32-escalation-hostilities-lebanon-4-june-2026)
