---
layout: feed_item
title: "A roadmap for energy access in displacement settings: Mauritania (READS)"
date: 2026-04-16 08:03:11 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['solar-power', 'renewable-energy']
keywords: ['solar-power', 'energy', 'roadmap', 'renewable-energy', 'access']
description: "Countries: Mauritania, Mali Sources: UN High Commissioner for Refugees, UN Institute for Training and Research Please refer to the attached file"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/mauritania/roadmap-energy-access-displacement-settings-mauritania-reads
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Countries: Mauritania, Mali Sources: UN High Commissioner for Refugees, UN Institute for Training and Research Please refer to the attached file. Executive Summary Globally, over 100 million people have been forcibly displaced from their homes. Amongst those living in camps and settlements, more than 80% rely on cooking with firewood over open fires for cooking whilst over 90% lack access to electricity. Sustainable Development Goal 7 (SDG 7) calls for universal access to affordable, reliable, sustainable, and modern energy for all by 2030 – including communities affected by displacement – and rapid progress is required to achieve this ambitious goal. The Roadmaps for Energy Access in Displacement Settings (READS) Programme aims to support the achievement of SDG 7 in ten countries affected by forced displacement including Mauritania, which hosts more than 300,000 refugees and asylum seekers. This report consolidates the status of energy access in displacement settings in Mauritania, provides an overview of the stakeholders working towards SDG 7, and presents opportunities for high-impact projects to support increased access to sustainable energy for displaced people and host communities. Energy access in displacement settings in Mauritania Household electricity Electricity access amongst households in Mbera camp is low, with the limited data showing most people rely on small solar lamps for lighting. The national grid is expected to be extended to the camp but the potential for last-mile connections is uncertain owing to the costs and safety issues associated with non-permanent shelters. The long supply chains and higher transport costs of operating in the remote Hodh Chargui region also increase prices for consumers and present a barrier to market entry for solar companies. Supporting the private sector could increase the availability and uptake of off-grid solar products. Flexible financing schemes for customers could accommodate varying incomes whilst subsidies could make products more accessible for low-income households. Pooling resources (such as warehouses, distribution outlets, and engagement events) could help stimulate the market and bring more companies to the region. Household cooking UNHCR's Cash for Gas programme has been successful in supporting clean cooking in Mbera camp, with around half of households using liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), while the remainder continue to use charcoal or firewood. LPG users can access refills in the camp and generally find refills affordable while suppliers offer different payment mechanisms. However, refills are more expensive in the camp than in the local town of Bassiknou, around 15 km away, and supplies can be unreliable which leads to fluctuating prices. Providing loans to camp-based LPG suppliers could allow them to undertake larger orders to stabilise supply and prices. As high costs and limited availability remain barriers to uptake amongst households using firewood and charcoal, implementing subsidies and sensitisation programmes for more vulnerable households could further increase LPG use. The opportunities for electric cooking could also be explored in the wider region once the national grid is extended.

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/mauritania/roadmap-energy-access-displacement-settings-mauritania-reads)
