---
layout: feed_item
title: "Green groups sue EU over inclusion of Portuguese lithium mine on priority list"
date: 2026-02-05 14:08:12 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['agriculture', 'year-2026', 'food-security', 'public-health', 'climate-health']
keywords: ['agriculture', 'year-2026', 'over', 'food-security', 'groups', 'green', 'public-health', 'climate-health']
description: "They filed the case at the European Court of Justice on Thursday"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/02/05/green-groups-sue-eu-over-inclusion-of-portuguese-lithium-mine-on-priority-list/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Environmental campaigners and community groups are suing the European Commission over its decision to designate a controversial lithium mine in Portugal as &#8220;strategic&#8221; to secure the minerals it needs for the energy transition. They argue that the Barroso mine, intended to supply lithium to the EV battery industry, poses serious environmental, social and safety risks and that the EU&#8217;s executive arm failed to properly assess the project&#8217;s sustainability. They filed the case at the European Court of Justice on Thursday. A spokesperson for the EU Commission said it could not comment on the case as legal proceedings have now started. The mine is one of 47 mineral projects, which the Commission labelled as “strategic“ to shore up the bloc&#8217;s reserves of energy transition minerals, granting them preferential treatment for gaining permits and easier access to EU funding. Feb 5, 2026 Clean Energy Frontier &#8216;America needs you&#8217;: US seeks trade alliance to break China&#8217;s critical mineral dominance The US has signed nearly a dozen mineral deals with countries as it called for the creation of a trading bloc to diversify supply chains away from China Read more Feb 3, 2026 Business UK government faces legal challenge over deep sea mining permits to &#8220;opaque&#8221; firm Greenpeace says UK may have acted unlawfully by transferring deep-sea mining licences to firm with US ties Read more Feb 3, 2026 Clean Energy Frontier West Africa&#8217;s first lithium mine awaits go-ahead as Ghana seeks better deal Ghana wants to benefit from the scramble for lithium but its reliance on mining firms for revenue and expertise weakens its ability to negotiate preferential terms, experts say Read more London-listed Savannah Resources is planning to dig four open pit mines in the northern Barroso region to extract&nbsp;lithium from&nbsp;Europe’s&nbsp;largest known deposit. The company says it will extract enough lithium every year to produce around half a million batteries for electric vehicles. However, local groups have staunchly opposed the mining project, citing concerns over waste management and water use as well as the impact of the mine on traditional agriculture in the area. Savannah Resources did not respond to a request for comment at the time of publication. EU Commission rejected NGOs&#8217; concerns The lawsuit comes weeks after the Commission rejected requests by green groups to review the status of 16 controversial projects on its strategic list, including the Barroso mine, despite environmental concerns expressed by NGOs and local communities. The Commission found their concerns to be &#8220;unfounded&#8221; and argued that member states were responsible for ensuring that the projects comply with EU environmental laws. Environmental NGO ClientEarth and the United Association for the Defense of Covas do Barroso (UDCB), which filed the case, argue that the Commission overlooked gaps in the assessment of the mine&#8217;s environmental impacts, including risks to protected species and the safety of a planned facility to store mining waste. They are asking the court to quash the Commission&#8217;s decision to keep the project on its strategic list and to clarify its obligations to ensure that projects on the list follow sustainable mining practices. “We are going to court because the Commission’s decision undermines fundamental EU legal principles,&#8221; they said in a statement. &#8220;Labelling a project ‘strategic’ and in the public interest while turning a blind eye to well-documented risks to water, ecosystems, human health and local livelihoods is simply unacceptable. The energy transition must be based on law, science and justice – not political shortcuts that turn rural regions into sacrifice zones,&#8221; they added. EU seeks to shore up access to minerals Under the EU’s Critical Raw Materials Act, the Commission identified a host of mining projects that could boost the bloc&#8217;s access to the minerals it needs to manufacture clean energy and other advanced technologies, as well as reduce its dependence on supplies from China. The law allows the Commission to designate mineral projects as strategic if they meet a series of criteria, including that the project “would be implemented sustainably” and monitor, prevent and minimise environmental and adverse social impacts. The status does not constitute an approval for the project and developers still need to obtain the necessary permits from the relevant national or regional authorities. The post Green groups sue EU over inclusion of Portuguese lithium mine on priority list appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/02/05/green-groups-sue-eu-over-inclusion-of-portuguese-lithium-mine-on-priority-list/)
