---
layout: feed_item
title: "Georgia is losing farmland fast. Is a state conservation fund enough to save it?"
date: 2026-06-17 08:30:00 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['year-2024', 'agriculture', 'food-security', 'urgent', 'climate-costs', 'economic-impacts']
keywords: ['year-2024', 'agriculture', 'food-security', 'urgent', 'climate-costs', 'farmland', 'georgia', 'losing']
description: "Georgia's legislature has allotted $2 million for the first year of the Georgia Farmland Conservation Fund"
external_url: https://grist.org/food-and-agriculture/georgia-is-losing-farmland-fast-is-a-state-conservation-fund-enough-to-save-it/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Grist"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Georgia's legislature has allotted $2 million for the first year of the Georgia Farmland Conservation Fund. Farm landowners across the state have applied for a piece of that funding to protect their land from development — for housing, warehouses, data centers, and other uses. Applicants will find out in August if they've been selected. Some 30 states have what are known as 'purchase of agricultural conservation easement' programs, though the amount of funding varies a great deal from state to state. Texas allocates $2 million annually, while Florida set aside $300 million in 2022 and $100 million in 2024. Georgia's law, modeled after these initiatives, was passed in 2023, established a formal program to coordinate federal, state, and local match funding, and created an advisory council to review and approve proposals. The legislature passed the initial round of funding in 2024, and the first round of applications closed May 20. The easements allow landowners to sell the future development rights for their land to an organization, like a land trust. An appraisal process determines the value of those development rights, and the farmer and easement holder negotiate the details of their agreement. The landowner receives an upfront payment, half of which comes from the state funds. The rest is match funding, which could come from a land trust, local government, or the U.S. Department of Agriculture, which allocates $450 million annually to match dollars in state conservation programs. The landowner can continue farming, growing and harvesting timber, or however else they use their land. They can even sell the land — just not to a developer who will turn it into housing, a strip mall, or an industrial site. 'It's a compelling alternative to our farming landowners that are feeling a lot of financial crunch and are just being inundated with offers for selling out,' said Katherine Moore, president of the Georgia Conservancy, which advocated for the new state fund. Those offers to sell can vary widely, depending on location, development plans, and many other factors. Prices in the sale of transitional land — property changing from one use to another — ranged from just over $6,000 to more than $260,000 per acre in 2025, according to a report by Saunders Land, a real estate brokerage and management firm. The value of a conservation easement varies widely too for similar reasons, though a landowner would typically receive less money for an easement than they would in an outright sale, since they're selling rights rather than the land itself. One such farmer is Russ Moon, who grows corn, soybeans, and strawberries and raises cattle on his family farm in Madison County, Georgia, outside of Athens. His family has worked that land for four generations, around 100 years. He wants to keep it that way and pass the farm on to his kids one day. Moon said he's watched more housing and development come to the area over the years. It's appealing to many, he said, to live near the University of Georgia in Athens and also enjoy the bucolic rural setting. Other farms around him have already sold, he said, and he's worried that if left unchecked, the development rush will fundamentally change the community. The irrigation system waters a field on Russ Moon's family farm outside Athens, Georgia. Russ Moon 'Selling the land is really not an option,' he said of his own plans. 'I intend on remaining in agriculture for as long as possible.' Moon said he'd only sell if forced to. But that could happen someday, for him or for his kids when they take over. Farming can be an unstable business, subject to weather and changing crop prices and global markets. 'There may be a day where they have to sell, but I don't want the land to be developed,' he said. 'That's my desire, that's my family's desire.' Some of Moon's land is in a conservation easement, which he entered into directly with a land trust in 2019. The state's new conservation fund aims to protect more land in a similar way by providing state funding to help facilitate such deals. It's a critical step, said Moore of the Georgia Conservancy. 'It is unprecedented for Georgia to have such a program, which is a little wild when you think that, you know, agribusiness in total is our number one economic engine in the state,' she said. Even though agriculture is Georgia's leading industry, farmers face mounting pressure to sell to developers. The state could lose some 800,000 acres of farmland by 2040, according to the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 'That means 10 percent of our farmland will be gone in the next 15 years or so,' said state agriculture commissioner Tyler Harper. 'And that's a staggering statistic.' That's a concern not only because farms provide food and jobs and are a big part of the state's economy, but also because of the potential climate impacts. Converting farmland to other uses can increase greenhouse gas emissions, according to the American Farmland Trust. Topsoil often has to be removed to pave the land, releasing the carbon that's stored in it. Uses like low-density residential development or industrial operations often produce more emissions than farming. Conservation easements, on the other hand, can encourage farming and management practices that sequester more carbon, and they often protect non-agricultural land adjacent to fields — like woods and wetlands. State leaders often tout the booming economy, proudly calling Georgia the number one state to do business. But that gives Moon pause. 'The whole time we keep being the number one place to do business, we're hurting our number one industry,' he said. That damage could be permanent. 'Once you develop a piece of property, you're never going to — it's never going to go back. You lose farmland, it's gone forever,' Moon said. He hopes that getting more farmland into conservation can help maintain some balance before it's too late. This story was originally published by Grist with the headline Georgia is losing farmland fast. Is a state conservation fund enough to save it? on Jun 17, 2026.

[Read original article](https://grist.org/food-and-agriculture/georgia-is-losing-farmland-fast-is-a-state-conservation-fund-enough-to-save-it/)
