---
layout: feed_item
title: "Officer in the IPCC Working Group III Technical Support Unit"
date: 2026-01-28 10:16:31 +0000
categories: [climate_science]
tags: ['climate-science', 'ipcc']
keywords: ['working', 'climate-science', 'ipcc', 'officer']
description: "Our goal is to help societies to transition to environmentally friendly and just conditions"
external_url: https://www.ipcc.ch/2026/01/28/officer-iipcc-wgiii-tsu/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "IPCC"
feed_category: "climate_science"
---

Working Group III (WGIII) of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is filling the position of Technical Support Unit Officer The&nbsp;University of Luxembourg&nbsp;is an international research university with a distinctly multilingual and interdisciplinary character. The&nbsp;Luxembourg Centre for Socio-Environmental Systems&nbsp;strives to grow into an internationally recognised research hub for a sustainable and equitable world. Our goal is to help societies to transition to environmentally friendly and just conditions. At the core is the recognition that global environmental disruptions such as climate change, biodiversity loss, and resource depletion are closely linked with societal systems. To address these complex issues, we take a systemic approach and study the interconnectedness of human activities and the environment. Our mission is to develop sustainable, socially just, and environmentally friendly solutions by bridging disciplines and fostering collaboration between researchers, policymakers, and society. LCSES&nbsp;is looking for a Support Officer for the Technical Support Unit (TSU) for Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Changes (IPCC). The TSU Officer will provide professional, organizational, and logistical support to the TSU Management Team and play an important role in coordinating scientific report processes. Your role Provide professional-level support to the TSU Management TeamOrganize and manage logistics for in-person and remote meetingsCoordinate scientific report processes, including spreadsheet configuration, information sharing, and online resource managementHelp coordinate author submissions, including help with the document management system and author portalServe as the principal point-of-contact for Chapter Scientists and Review EditorsContribute content for WGIII pages of the IPCC website and author guidance materialsProvide technical support during approval plenaries, including on-screen editingMonitor and respond to general enquiries directed to the TSUUndertake additional tasks as directed by the TSU Head of Operations Your profile You bring experience in organizational support, scientific coordination, and stakeholder engagement, demonstrated by the following qualifications: Master’s degree in administration, environmental sciences, or a related fieldFirst experience in coordinating projects, ideally in international or scientific contextsStrong skills in spreadsheet configuration, document management systems, and online collaboration toolsFamiliarity with scientific publishing processes or international organizations is an advantageMotivation to contribute to the success of the TSU and its scientific mission Soft Skills Excellent communication and interpersonal skillsStrong organizational abilities and project management experienceCreativity, strategic thinking, and problem-solving mindsetAbility to collaborate effectively in multicultural and interdisciplinary teamsConsistent ability to meet deadlines through organized, pragmatic, and effective work practices Language requirements: Fluency in English is mandatory. French or German is considered an asset We offer Multilingual and international character.&nbsp;Modern institution with a personal atmosphere. Staff coming from 90 countries. Member of the “University of the Greater Region”&nbsp;(UniGR)A modern and dynamic university.&nbsp;High-quality equipment.&nbsp;Close ties to the business world and to the Luxembourg labour market.&nbsp;A unique urban site with excellent infrastructureA partner for society and industry.&nbsp;Cooperation with European institutions, innovative companies, the Financial Centre and with numerous non-academic&nbsp;partners such as ministries, local governments, associations, NGOs … How to apply Applications should include: Curriculum VitaeCover letter indicating your motivation for this role, relevant experience, and future interestsA brief summary of prior comparable projects with descriptions of your contributionsContact information for three professional references Early application is highly encouraged, as the applications will be processed upon reception. Please apply ONLINE formally through the HR system. Applications by Email will not be considered. All qualified individuals are encouraged to apply. In line with our values, the University of Luxembourg promotes an inclusive culture. We encourage applications from individuals of all backgrounds and are dedicated to upholding equality and respect for our employees and students. General information: Contract Type: Fixed Term Contract 36 MonthWork Hours: Full Time 40.0 Hours per WeekLocation: Belval CampusInternal Title: Research and development specialistJob Reference: UOL07953

[Read original article](https://www.ipcc.ch/2026/01/28/officer-iipcc-wgiii-tsu/)
