---
layout: feed_item
title: "Micronesia: FSM: Cyclone - 04-2026 - Typhoon Sinlaku"
date: 2026-04-17 05:27:44 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['typhoon', 'climate-health', 'public-health', 'cyclone', 'tropical-storms', 'urgent', 'year-2026']
keywords: ['typhoon', 'cyclone', 'tropical-storms', 'climate-health', 'public-health', 'micronesia']
description: "On 12 April 2026, the State of Chuuk was placed under a state of emergency, with officials reporting severe and catastrophic damage"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/micronesia-federated-states/fsm-cyclone-04-2026-typhoon-sinlaku
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: Micronesia (Federated States of) Sources: International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, Micronesia Red Cross Society Please refer to the attached file. Description Typhoon Sinlaku affected the Chuuk Lagoon Islands - Fananu, Ulul and Polowat - with prolonged and intense condition, keeping the islands exposed to a continuous cycle of destructive weather. On 12 April 2026, the State of Chuuk was placed under a state of emergency, with officials reporting severe and catastrophic damage. The situation across Weno, Tamatam, Piherarh, Onoun, Uman, Parem, and Fanapanges has deteriorated into a full-scale emergency. By 14 of April, the storm moved toward the Mariana Islands, lifting all warning and typhoon watches. Chuuk State is experiencing a near-total blackout, with hospitals operating on backup emergency power and communications disrupted across the lagoon and outer islands. All schools and government services have been suspended until further notice. Most roads on Weno are currently impassable. The vessel Ms. Chief Mailo (Chuuk State) is lying on its side, carrying approximately 4,000 gallons of fuel, posing a significant safety and environmental risk. One individual is reported missing at sea, and one fatality has been confirmed on the island of Tonoas. Three emergency shelters have been established, currently hosting approximately 100 displaced residents. An estimated 34,000 people across Chuuk State are potentially affected. The islands of Weno, Fananu, Piherarh, Tamatam, Onoun, Fanapanges, Parem, and Uman have reported significant damage to homes, infrastructure, and food crops. Preliminary reports indicate urgent humanitarian needs across affected areas, with priority needs including food, safe drinking water, shelter, communication, and power. Request For Assistance Government Requests International Assistance No NS Requests International Assistance Yes Information Bulletin Published Requested Actions taken by National Society General Damage/Needs assessment Summary The Micronesia Red Cross Society is working closely with authorities and partners to assess needs and support affected communities through emergency response and relief efforts. MRCS has requested a DREF application. Joint operations with NDMO in Chuuk with the use of 6 drums of gasoline secured by MRCS from UNICEF. MRCS relief supplies are part of the inventory of the ship loading for Chuuk. MRCS will be distributing 200 Sawyer portable water filtration system to households donated by UNICEF (200 units) and the Pohnpei State Health Department (200 units). Starlink unit procured in Guam and will be dropped off in Chuuk (on 19 April) to establish stable communication on the ground. To ensure operational continuity, MRCS is using propane powered gensets. Actions taken by Federation Summary Coordination and technical support for submitting the DREF application. Actions taken by RCRC Summary The American Red Cross has transferred USD 25,000 to the MRCS to support immediate response operations. National Head Quarters in the US mainland is providing remote tech support to set up communication link. Actions taken by others Government declared National Emergency and activated up to USD 500,000 to support rapid assessments, emergency relief operations and deployment of vessels and assessment teams. EOC has been activated, public announcement on social media have been issued and SITREP 3 released. The CDEOC coordinates response effort. Initial response actions focused on power restoration, emergency water supplies delivered to shelters and hospitals, generator supply, private donation. A ship will leave Pohnpei for Chuuk State on the 17 April (delays due to cargo loading). Part of the inventory of the ship includes 3,000 bottles of drinking water procured by the government locally in Pohnpei, 1000 sacks (40 pounder) of rice, and the MRCS relief supplies. Planned International Response DREF Requested Contacts Originator Romane Dabout, Disaster and Climate Crisis Intern, IFRC, CCD Suva Federation Maciu Nokelevu, CCD Suva, DRM Manager Media Seci Burese, Senior communication National Society Frank Jr. ISAO, Secretary General

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/micronesia-federated-states/fsm-cyclone-04-2026-typhoon-sinlaku)
