---
layout: feed_item
title: "Nigel Farage Has Accepted £2 Million Since Becoming an MP"
date: 2026-05-06 19:32:27 +0000
categories: [media]
tags: ['climate-communication', 'urgent', 'year-2024', 'media-coverage']
keywords: ['nigel', 'year-2024', 'accepted', 'farage', 'urgent', 'climate-communication', 'media-coverage']
description: "Reform UK leader Nigel Farage has banked more than £2 million in earnings and gifts since becoming an MP, DeSmog can reveal"
external_url: https://www.desmog.com/2026/05/06/nigel-farage-has-accepted-2-million-since-becoming-an-mp/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "DeSmog"
feed_category: "media"
---

Reform UK leader Nigel Farage has banked more than £2 million in earnings and gifts since becoming an MP, DeSmog can reveal. Farage has come under fire in recent days for failing to declare a £5 million gift from major Reform donor Christopher Harborne prior to the 2024 general election, potentially in violation of parliamentary rules. Despite this tax-free handout, Farage has used his time in Parliament to earn millions from second jobs, speaking events, and trips abroad. DeSmog's analysis shows that Farage has registered more than £2 million in financial interests since July 2024, when he was elected as the MP for Clacton. Subscribe to our newsletter Stay up to date with DeSmog news and alerts Name --> Email Address What content do you want to subscribe to? (check all that apply) All International UK Sign Up His principal employer has been the right-wing broadcaster GB News, which has now paid Farage £700,000 since July 2024. The Reform leader – who presents a show on GB News – registered another £40,662 from the outlet last week. This income has been received on top of Farage's £94,000-a-year public salary. He also listed a new gift from South African businessman Avi Lasarow, who gave the Reform leader three tickets to a boxing match on 4 April worth £1,749. 'Nigel Farage is a multi-millionaire who is out for himself and working for the interests of his super-rich friends,' a Green Party spokesperson said. 'His whole career has been focused on personal gain and public division. He is failing his constituents and has no positive plan to help ordinary people with the cost of living crisis, housing or improving public services.' Since becoming an MP, Farage has accepted £272,000 in gifts, including several private jet flights to the United States, and F1 tickets provided by the Abu Dhabi government. 'That Farage has amassed £2 million from personal earnings and gifts while a sitting member of Parliament should concern anyone who thinks an MP's job is to represent their constituents,' said Kamila Kingstone, a senior campaign lead at Spotlight on Corruption. 'It's a systemic issue and highlights a wider failure of the rules that are supposed to ensure integrity in public life. It risks blurring the lines between public service and private interests, creating the perception – and in some cases a reality – that some politicians are in it for themselves.' DeSmog revealed in April that over 70 percent of Farage's patrons are based abroad – including Harborne, the Thailand-based crypto investor who has gifted flights and accommodation to Farage worth £85,453 since July 2024. Harborne, who owns a jet fuel supplier, has donated £22 million to Reform on top of the £5 million that he gifted to Farage before the 2024 general election. His contributions to the party are now in jeopardy after Labour introduced new rules that cap political donations from overseas residents to £100,000 a year. In response, Harborne has committed to finding a loophole through which he can donate even larger sums to Reform. 'Where there's a will, there's a way,' he told The Telegraph – adding: 'I don't believe the government has a right to stop me, and they won't.' Reform UK is the UK's leading anti-climate party, with several of its senior figures – including Farage – having denied basic climate science. The Reform leader has claimed it's 'absolutely nuts' for CO2 to be considered a pollutant, while his deputy Richard Tice has called it 'plant food'. 'The government urgently needs to impose tougher limits on MPs' second jobs,' Kingstone added, 'so that the public can be confident that their representatives are working in the public interest rather than to line their own pockets.' Reform and Farage were approached for comment. A version of this article was published by The Guardian. The post Nigel Farage Has Accepted £2 Million Since Becoming an MP appeared first on DeSmog.

[Read original article](https://www.desmog.com/2026/05/06/nigel-farage-has-accepted-2-million-since-becoming-an-mp/)
