---
layout: feed_item
title: "At ‘Davos of mining’, Saudi Arabia shapes new narrative on minerals"
date: 2026-01-16 12:36:05 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['climate-costs', 'economic-impacts', 'emissions', 'year-2025', 'fossil-fuels']
keywords: ['saudi', 'davos', 'climate-costs', 'economic-impacts', 'mining', 'emissions', 'year-2025', 'fossil-fuels']
description: "As competition for natural resources fractures the global order, Saudi Arabia is cementing its position as the centre of gravity for international discussion..."
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/01/16/at-davos-of-mining-saudi-arabia-shapes-new-narrative-on-minerals/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

As competition for natural resources fractures the global order, Saudi Arabia is cementing its position as the centre of gravity for international discussions to accelerate the production of minerals the world needs for clean energy and digital technologies. Ministers and senior representatives from more than 100 countries gathered in Riyadh this week for the Future Minerals Forum, an annual event that has become a mainstay of the minerals industry’s calendar since its launch in 2022. Among them were representatives from all G20 countries, which include the US, Canada, China, Germany, France and Russia, as well resource-rich African and Latin American nations, the Saudi government said. &nbsp; The fast-expanding forum has been a tour de force in helping position oil and mineral-rich Saudi Arabia at the heart of the conversation to step up production of minerals at a time when competition for resources is dominating global politics. Sep 10, 2025 Clean Energy Frontier Digging beyond oil: Saudi Arabia bids to become a hub for energy transition minerals The top crude exporter is using its oil riches to position itself as a major player in clean energy supply chains. Investors are interested, but hurdles remain Read more Dec 12, 2025 Clean Energy Frontier Push for global minerals deal meets opposition, more talks agreed Colombia&#8217;s proposal for the UNEA to set up an expert group to identify options for governing mineral supply chains was rejected by a broad group of states Read more Dec 16, 2025 Clean Energy Frontier Outdated geological data limits Africa&#8217;s push to benefit from its mineral wealth As companies flock to Africa to secure minerals for the energy transition, unreliable and century-old mapping risks stifling investment Read more President Donald Trump has made control over natural resources and access to critical minerals a core tenet of the US&#8217;s national security strategy as it seeks to curb China&#8217;s dominance over mineral supply chains. In a massive disruption to the global order, Washington has deployed forces to seize Venezuelan oil, both physically from sanctioned tankers and indirectly by deposing its leader, and is making a play to acquire mineral-rich Greenland from fellow NATO-member Denmark. “The reality is that we are in the middle of what is happening in the world,” Adel Al-Jubeir, Saudi Arabia’s minister of state for foreign affairs, told the minerals conference. “Our objective is not to seek more territory or more people or more minerals,” he said. “Our objective is stability and calm so that we can focus on resources and building a better future.” A global decision-shaping platform The world’s second-largest oil producer, Saudi Arabia sits on minerals worth an&nbsp;estimated $2.5 trillion &#8211; including lithium, rare earths, zinc and copper – all of which are needed to manufacture batteries and other clean energy technologies. Under its Vision 2030 development plan, Saudi Arabia has made mining a key pillar for diversifying its economy away from fossil fuels and is investing its oil revenues into becoming a hub for processing and trading minerals. “There’s only one [country] – that’s the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia – that has the trust of enough countries to convene at this critical time,” said Scott Brison, vice-chair of BMO Wealth Management, whose banking arm specialises in the metals and mining sector. “This [forum], in a very short time, has become the Davos of mining,” he added. Like the famed Swiss ski resort, which will host the annual World Economic Forum next week, the Future Minerals Forum has become a must-attend annual event for investors and decision-makers, who seek to broker deals and invest in mineral value chains. Saudi Arabia’s minister of industry and mineral resources, Bandar bin Ibrahim Al-Khorayef, described the event as “a global decision-shaping platform” that “influences policies, mobilise[s] investment and build[s] collaboration across the entire mineral value chain”. It comes just weeks after Saudi Arabia opposed any discussion of possible binding rules at the UN to limit the environmental harm caused by mining and make supply chains more transparent. A view of the cityscape in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia (Photo: REUTERS/Mohammed Benmansour) US pitch for partners The forum focused on the challenges of meeting rapidly-rising demand for minerals, driven by the roll-out of clean energy technologies and AI infrastructure, amid funding gaps and political uncertainty. Industry leaders agreed that Saudi Arabia’s geographic location, mineral wealth, extensive relations with both the West and China – originally built on fossil fuel exports – and vast amounts of cheap energy make the Kingdom well-placed to become a global minerals processing hub. Amid geopolitical tensions, “the Kingdom has the ability to be a neutral processor” and supply the US market, said José Luis Manzano, chairman of private investment group Integra Capital. The US and Saudi Arabia have already agreed to co-operate on mineral supply chains, with the US government pledging to finance a new rare earths refinery in the country. Earlier this week, Trump signed an executive order calling for &#8220;agreements with foreign trading partners&#8221; to help reduce US dependence on China. Addressing the Riyadh conference, , defended President Trump’s approach to securing mineral supplies from resource-rich countries, insisting the US “seeks to have great partnerships where we all bring different things to the table”. “There’s no strong-arming, there’s only strategic alliances to better our nations and better the world,” she said. Yet, when it comes to Greenland, she warned: “I would take our president at his word.&#8221; Riyadh pledges to break with old ways Delegates also discussed improving the transparency of mineral supply chains and ensuring that local communities endowed with mineral wealth benefit from their extraction. Saudi minister of state for foreign affairs Al-Jubeir said the “old ways” that saw “foreign companies come in, mine, exploit, take all the value outside of the country and leave the host country with nothing but a big hole on its territory” had to change. “The new view is we need to invest. We need to keep as much of the value chain as we can in-country so that we produce jobs [and] opportunities, which in turn produce stability, which in turn helps all of us around the world.” Dec 16, 2025 Clean Energy Frontier Outdated geological data limits Africa&#8217;s push to benefit from its mineral wealth As companies flock to Africa to secure minerals for the energy transition, unreliable and century-old mapping risks stifling investment Read more Jul 8, 2025 Clean Energy Frontier Nigeria’s push to cash in on lithium rush gets off to a rocky start The West African nation wants to supply refined lithium to the EV battery industry to diversify its economy away from oil &#8211; but early processing efforts are facing challenges Read more Feb 18, 2025 Clean Energy Frontier Ending poverty and gangs: How Zambia seeks to cash in on the global drive for EVs Zambia is wooing international investors to develop its copper resources but communities dependent on illegal mining want a better deal Read more At the same time, to establish itself as a minerals processing hub, Saudi Arabia is seeking to broker bilateral deals with developing countries, particularly in Africa, to secure access to resources it can refine. Several ministers from mineral-rich African nations, including Democratic Republic of the Congo, Zambia, Ghana, Mauritania and Morocco, attended the conference. Riyadh is also working with the World Bank on funding opportunities for seven planned infrastructure corridors to accelerate minerals development in Africa and Latin America and help get resources to the market. Saudi strategy stirs Africa tensions Nonetheless, Nafi Quarshie, Africa director of the Natural Resource Governance Institute, who attended the forum, told Climate Home News there is &#8220;tension&#8221; between Saudi Arabia’s plan to process minerals and African nations&#8217; ambitions to add value to their resources and reduce exports of raw materials. “There&#8217;s a kind of a push for Africa to do business with Saudi Arabia,” she said. It remains unclear how African governments can ensure that any minerals agreement with Saudi Arabia creates a win-win situation and helps drive investment to refine ores into higher-value products for clean technologies on the continent, she added. There were few civil society representatives in the glitzy halls of the King Abdulaziz International Conference Center, while communities impacted by mining projects were not represented. Yet, if Saudi Arabia is serious about doing things differently, activists and affected peoples need to be included in the forum to put transparency, human rights and environment protection at the core of the discussions, said Quarshie. The post At &#8216;Davos of mining&#8217;, Saudi Arabia shapes new narrative on minerals appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/01/16/at-davos-of-mining-saudi-arabia-shapes-new-narrative-on-minerals/)
