---
layout: feed_item
title: "Vacancy: Three-week summer journalism internship at Carbon Brief"
date: 2026-05-06 14:13:16 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['displacement', 'climate-migration']
keywords: ['week', 'vacancy', 'climate-migration', 'displacement', 'three']
description: "Carbon Brief is offering an exciting opportunity for students, or recent graduates, to work with the team for three weeks this summer"
external_url: https://www.carbonbrief.org/vacancy-three-week-summer-journalism-internship-at-carbon-brief-3/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Carbon Brief"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Carbon Brief is offering an exciting opportunity for students, or recent graduates, to work with the team for three weeks this summer. This journalism internship will be paid the London Living Wage, with an additional travel bursary. Job description Carbon Brief's award-winning journalism and analysis is respected by scientists, journalists, policymakers and campaigners around the world. We write articles and create data visualisations, infographics and videos to explain the latest climate science and related policy issues. You'll spend time shadowing members of staff and helping out with the different tasks carried out by each part of the team. This includes journalists working on topics ranging from climate science through to China's emissions, as well as specialists working on visuals and social media. If you're interested in whether carbon offsets are a viable climate solution, or how climate change is driving human migration, then this is the placement for you. What you will do Have the opportunity to research, write and publish an article for Carbon Brief. Promote your article using visuals and social media. Assist with the research and writing of Carbon Brief's award-winning newsletters. Help decide how Carbon Brief covers the latest developments in climate change, by helping to find stories in scientific papers and policy documents. Create and discuss content for social media. What you will learn Experience how a small, independent but global journalism team works in practice. See how Carbon Brief puts together articles step by step. Learn how we interrogate news, data and reports. Pick up skills on how to make best use of visuals in your journalism. Your skills Interest in climate change. Some experience of writing on a technical topic for a general audience, which can include self-publishing. Interest in journalism and a commitment to the integrity of journalism. Competency in word processing and spreadsheet packages, such as MS Word/Excel or Google Docs/Sheets. Excellent spoken and written English. Experience with social media, such as Twitter/X and Instagram, would be a benefit. Location: The internship will follow a hybrid format, involving time in person at our offices near London Bridge station in central London as well as remote working. Reporting to: Our Associate Editor Daisy Dunne. Hours/Duration: This is a three-week-long placement which will take place in the summer months from 13-31 July. Our office hours are 9am to 5pm Monday to Friday, with an hour for lunch. Salary: London Living Wage (£14.80/hour), plus £100 towards travel expenses. How to apply To apply, please send: Your CV. A short covering letter of no more than 300 words, explaining why you would be a good fit for the internship and how you would benefit from it. Please include a paragraph explaining how Carbon Brief first caught your attention and pitch one idea for a Carbon Brief article. Any letter generated using AI will invalidate the application. A link or attachment for an article you have published. This can either be in traditional or student media, or on a personal blog. To: jobs@carbonbrief.org (please use 'Internship application' in the email's subject line). Applications must be submitted by 9am UK time on 1 June. Interviews will likely be held on the week beginning 8 June. Applicants must already have the right to work permanently in the UK and be more than 18 years of age. Carbon Brief is committed to encouraging equality, diversity and inclusion among our workforce. Our aim is to be truly representative of all sections of society and for each employee to feel respected and able to give their best. We strongly encourage applications from those who feel underrepresented in climate journalism, including ethnic and social minorities. The post Vacancy: Three-week summer journalism internship at Carbon Brief appeared first on Carbon Brief.

[Read original article](https://www.carbonbrief.org/vacancy-three-week-summer-journalism-internship-at-carbon-brief-3/)
