---
layout: feed_item
title: "Governments defend energy transition as US snubs renewables agency"
date: 2026-01-11 19:07:50 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['hurricane', 'renewable-energy', 'cyclone', 'emissions', 'solar-power', 'insurance', 'tropical-storms', 'fossil-fuels', 'climate-risk', 'year-2026']
keywords: ['hurricane', 'renewable-energy', 'cyclone', 'emissions', 'solar-power', 'energy', 'defend', 'governments']
description: "IRENA&#8217;s statute says withdrawal of a member country takes effect at the end of the year in which it is notified"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/01/11/europe-governments-defend-renewables-us-trump-irena-international-agency/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

After the United States announced last week it would withdraw from the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), effectively slashing more than a fifth of its core budget, the organisation&#8217;s head said it could &#8220;manage&#8221; the US exit, as top officials argued the energy transition is &#8220;unstoppable&#8221;. Speaking to reporters at IRENA’s 16th Assembly in Abu Dhabi, Director-General Francesco La Camera said the US had yet to formally notify the agency it would be leaving. IRENA&#8217;s statute says withdrawal of a member country takes effect at the end of the year in which it is notified. Until that point, they remain a member with all its rights, including the right to vote, but also “the duty to pay”, La Camera added. Jan 8, 2026 News Trump to pull US out of UN climate convention and climate science body The decision will make the US the only country to leave the UNFCCC, with the UN climate chief calling it a &#8220;colossal own goal&#8221; that will harm the US economy Read more Jan 11, 2026 News Renewables create fewer jobs globally as energy transition enters &#8220;new phase&#8221; The surge in employment linked to clean energy equipment and installation is slowing as large-scale plants and increasing automation require less labour Read more Jan 9, 2026 News Israel’s fossil gas power play pushes climate action to the sidelines Even as it faces international condemnation over the Gaza war, Israel is working to boost natural gas exports and offshore exploration to strengthen its strategic and regional ties Read more On Sunday, IRENA’s member countries – around 170 in total – adopted a budget for the coming two years, which shows the US is expected to contribute 22% of IRENA’s core funding, with its share amounting to nearly $5.7 million for 2026. La Camera said IRENA is already talking to governments and the private sector to fill the potential financial hole if the US does not deliver on its financial obligations, as has been the case in previous years with the UN climate secretariat and the Green Climate Fund. “We know that some of these usual donors are considering to put something in our budget &#8211; we are also trying to get some money from the companies that are part of our initiatives… and we will see other ways that we can pursue,” he added. “I know that we can manage one way or another.” During country statements made on Sunday afternoon, which were closed to the media, there had been expectations that China might step up to close the gap, but that did not happen. The United Arab Emirates, Germany and other European nations are substantial government donors to IRENA, although the agency’s core budget has barely risen since 2018, documents show. That has limited its ability to expand its activities even as demand rises across developing countries and small island states for greater technical and policy support to boost renewables. La Camera noted that, following the US decision to pull out under Donald Trump, IRENA&#8217;s council may need to propose amendments to its approved budget for 2026-2027 ahead of its next meeting in May. Melford Nicholas, minister of information technologies, utilities and energy for Antigua and Barbuda, who is also a newly elected vice president of IRENA, told Climate Home News the US move would &#8220;not be an insignificant development&#8221; but Europeans had indicated they could help make up the shortfall. Clean energy for &#8220;opportunity and necessity&#8221; At the opening session of the two-day assembly, La Camera and other top officials affirmed the importance of renewable energy as the best choice for energy and economic security at a time of rising geopolitical tensions driven by fossil fuel interests. Selwin Hart, special adviser to the UN Secretary-General on Climate Action and Just Transition, said the world is clearly changing its energy system to clean sources “not out of idealism, but out of opportunity and necessity”. He noted that three out of four people live in countries that are net importers of fossil fuels, exposing them to geopolitical shocks, volatile prices and balance of payment pressures. Examples of this include the rise in gas prices in Europe after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in 2024 led to sanctions. “The energy transition is taking place… not only based on climate considerations, but based on costs, based on competitiveness and energy security and energy independence,” Hart added. “These are the driving forces now &#8211; hardcore economic, hardcore national security [and] strategic reasons.” Brazil’s Lula requests national roadmap for fossil fuel transition In a video message, Annalena Baerbock, president of the UN General Assembly and former foreign minister of Germany, said “we are living in heavy, challenging times” &#8211; but despite setbacks and political headwinds, “the march to a renewable energy future has proven unstoppable”. She added that global renewable capacity has now reached more than 4,400 gigawatts, almost 30 times that of 2015 when the Paris climate agreement was adopted, while a record $2.4 trillion was invested in the energy transition in 2024. “There is no way back,” she added. However, she and Hart both noted that more needs to be done to support African countries to unlock finance for clean energy, as it lags far behind other regions and receives only around 2% of investment in the sector. Challenges for small island states The substantial needs of small island developing states (SIDS) are also front and centre at the IRENA Assembly, where ministers have discussed the challenges of shifting away from costly diesel and other polluting fuels while being exposed to rising climate shocks such as destructive cyclones. Antigua and Barbuda&#8217;s minister Nicholas pointed to the difficulty of gaining insurance for renewable energy facilities as a key barrier in an era when storms can cause huge damage. This happened in Barbuda in 2017 when Hurricane Irma wiped out a solar plant that was not insured. Governments including the United Arab Emirates and New Zealand helped to rebuild it. Antigua and Barbuda&#8217;s Minister Melford Nicholas speaks at the IRENA 16th Assembly in Abu Dhabi, UAE, on January 11, 2026 (Photo: IRENA) Antigua and Barbuda&#8217;s Minister Melford Nicholas speaks at the IRENA 16th Assembly in Abu Dhabi, UAE, on January 11, 2026 (Photo: IRENA) Nicholas said SIDS are still in need of concessional finance, which could “become increasingly challenging for us” in the current international environment. “It&#8217;s an issue, because that retards the speed at which we&#8217;re able to get to renewable energy transition,” he added, noting his country is likely to reach an energy mix of around 60% renewables by 2030 rather than the 100% it had aimed for. Despite the obstacles, ministers from Caribbean countries like St Kitts and Nevis and Dominica showcased examples of planned geothermal plants that will enable them to phase down fossil fuels dramatically. IRENA’s La Camera said he was optimistic the world would get very close to realising a global goal of tripling renewable energy capacity by the end of this decade, but was still lagging behind on a twin target of doubling energy efficiency by 2030. To help catalyse a global transition away from fossil fuels, he added that IRENA would work with COP host nations on a roadmap to that end, which they are due to present at the COP31 UN climate summit in Turkey in November, as well as a potential target for electrification consistent with that plan. The post Governments defend energy transition as US snubs renewables agency appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/01/11/europe-governments-defend-renewables-us-trump-irena-international-agency/)
