---
layout: feed_item
title: "Congress rescues aid budget from Trump’s “evisceration” but climate misses out"
date: 2026-02-05 16:57:49 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['emissions', 'year-2025', 'fossil-fuels', 'climate-costs', 'economic-impacts', 'public-health', 'climate-health']
keywords: ['emissions', 'year-2025', 'fossil-fuels', 'climate-costs', 'economic-impacts', 'congress', 'rescues', 'budget']
description: "Under pressure from Congress, President Donald Trump quietly signed into law a funding package that provides billions of dollars more in foreign assistance s..."
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/02/05/congress-rescues-aid-budget-from-trumps-evisceration-but-climate-misses-out/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Under pressure from Congress, President Donald Trump quietly signed into law a funding package that provides billions of dollars more in foreign assistance spending than he had originally wanted to for the fiscal year between October 2025 and September 2026. The legislation allocates $50 billion, $9 billion less than the level agreed the previous year under President Biden but $19 billion more than Trump proposed, restoring health and humanitarian aid spending to near pre-Trump levels. Democratic Senator Patty Murray, vice-chair of the committee on appropriations, said that &#8220;while including some programmatic funding cuts, the bill rejects the Trump administration’s evisceration of US foreign assistance programmes&#8221;. But, with climate a divisive issue in the US, spending on dedicated climate programmes was largely absent. Clarence Edwards, executive director of E3G&#8217;s US office, told Climate Home News that &#8220;the era of large US government investment in climate policy is over, at least for the foreseeable future&#8221;. The package ruled out any support for the Climate Investment Funds&#8217; Clean Technology Fund, which supports low-carbon technologies in developing countries and had received $150 million from the US in the previous fiscal year. The US also made no pledge to the Africa Development Fund (ADF) &#8211; a mechanism run by the African Development Bank that provides grants and low-interest loans to the poorest African nations. A government spokesperson told Reuters that decision reflected concerns that &#8220;like too many other institutions, the ADF has adopted a disproportionate focus on climate change, gender, and social issues&#8221;. GEF spared from cuts Trump did, however, agree to Congress&#8217;s request to make $150 million &#8211; more than last year &#8211; available for the Global Environment Facility (GEF), which tackles environmental issues like biodiversity loss, land degradation and climate change. Edwards said that GEF funding &#8220;survived due to Congressional pushback and a refocus on non-climate priorities like biodiversity, plastics and ocean ecosystems, per US Treasury guidance&#8221;. Congress also pressured Trump into giving $54 million to the Rome-based International Fund for Agricultural Development. Its goals include helping small-scale farmers adapt to climate change and reduce emissions. Jan 28, 2026 Politics Explainer: Out of Paris, but will the US formally quit the UN climate regime? The Trump administration has decided to withdraw the US from the broader UN climate convention, raising questions about the legality of the move and what it means in practice Read more Feb 5, 2026 Clean Energy Frontier &#8216;America needs you&#8217;: US seeks trade alliance to break China&#8217;s critical mineral dominance The US has signed nearly a dozen mineral deals with countries as it called for the creation of a trading bloc to diversify supply chains away from China Read more Without any pressure from Congress, Trump approved tens of millions of dollars each for multilateral development banks in Asia, Africa and Europe and just over a billion dollars for the World Bank&#8217;s International Development Association, which funds development projects in the world&#8217;s poorest countries. As most of these banks have climate programmes and goals, much of this money is likely to be spent on climate action. The largest lender, the World Bank, aims to devote 45% of its finance to climate programmes, although, as Climate Home News has reported, its definition of climate spending is considered too loose by some analysts. The bill also earmarks $830 million &#8211; nearly triple what Trump originally wanted &#8211; for the Millennium Challenge Corporation, a George W. Bush-era institution that has increasingly backed climate-focussed projects like transmission lines to bring clean hydropower to cities in Nepal. No funding boost for DFC While Congress largely increased spending, it rejected Trump&#8217;s call for nearly $4 billion for the Development Finance Corporation (DFC), granting just under $1 billion instead &#8211; similar to previous years. Under Biden, there had been a push to get the DFC to support clean energy projects. But the Trump administration ended DFC&#8217;s support for projects like South Africa&#8217;s clean energy transition. May 13, 2025 Energy Trump shifts US funds from shutting down foreign fossil fuels to expanding them The US administration has pulled clean energy and just transition funding in South Africa and is pressuring EXIM and the World Bank to back fossil fuels Read more Feb 5, 2026 Investigations Gas flaring soars in Niger Delta post-Shell, afflicting communities Since the multinational sold its assets in Nigeria’s oil hub, data analysis for Climate Home News shows flaring has risen, harming locals and the climate Read more At a recent board meeting, the DFC&#8217;s board &#8211; now dominated by Trump administration officials &#8211; approved US financial support for Chevron Mediterranean Limited, the developers of an Israeli gas field. Kate DeAngelis, deputy director at Friends of the Earth US told Climate Home News it was good for the climate that Trump had not been able to boost the DFC&#8217;s budget. &#8220;DFC seems set up to focus mainly on the dirtiest deals without any focus on development,&#8221; she said. US Congressional elections in November could lead to Democrats retaking control of one or both houses of Congress. Edwards said that &#8220;Democratic gains might restore funding [in the next fiscal year], while Republican holds would likely extend cuts&#8221;. But he warned that &#8220;budgetary pressures and a murky economic environment don’t hold promise of increases in US funding for foreign assistance and climate programs, regardless of which party controls Congress&#8221;. The post Congress rescues aid budget from Trump&#8217;s &#8220;evisceration&#8221; but climate misses out appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/02/05/congress-rescues-aid-budget-from-trumps-evisceration-but-climate-misses-out/)
