---
layout: feed_item
title: "India, Saudi Arabia and Argentina fail to submit climate plans in 2025"
date: 2026-01-02 09:40:00 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['climate-summit', 'cop29', 'climate-policy', 'paris-agreement', 'year-2025']
keywords: ['climate-summit', 'cop29', 'climate-policy', 'paris-agreement', 'india', 'arabia', 'saudi', 'year-2025']
description: "Most of them landed in late 2025 and outline targets and measures to cut planet-heating emissions and adapt to climate impacts through to 2035"
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/01/02/india-saudi-arabia-and-argentina-fail-to-submit-climate-plans-in-2025/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

India, Saudi Arabia and Argentina are among the roughly 70 nations that did not submit updated climate plans to the United Nations in 2025, despite the 2015 Paris Agreement&#8217;s requirement that countries do so every five years. According to Climate Action Tracker, about three-fifths of countries have submitted their latest nationally determined contributions (NDCs) to the UN climate body. Most of them landed in late 2025 and outline targets and measures to cut planet-heating emissions and adapt to climate impacts through to 2035. Those countries that have formally submitted new NDCs include all G20 nations except India, Saudi Arabia and Argentina. The Trump administration, meanwhile, has indicated it will not deliver on the US&#8217;s Biden-era NDC as it pulls the world&#8217;s second-largest emitting country out of the Paris Agreement. Many of the governments that have not submitted NDCs are low-emitting small or poorer nations, especially in Africa. But major economies that have not submitted an NDC &#8211; some of which also have energy transition deals with donors &#8211; include Egypt, the Philippines and Vietnam. Climate Action Tracker&#8217;s map of countries that had filed NDCs (blue and green) and those that had not (grey), as of December 19, 2025 The United Nations tried to encourage on-time submission of this third round of NDCs by setting soft deadlines. Just 13 countries met a first February 10 deadline and around 60 of the 195 signatories to the Paris Agreement met a September deadline, allowing them to be included in a key UN synthesis report. The UN&#8217;s Paris Agreement Compliance Committee &#8211; made up of climate negotiators from different governments &#8211; has expressed concern about governments not submitting NDCs, or doing so late, and asked them to explain themselves. After talking to governments that missed the February deadline, it found a host of obstacles including insufficient financial support; technical challenges like a lack of data or problems coordinating across sectors and including different groups; and other issues like political instability or genocide. India keeps world guessing The Indian government has been tight-lipped on its NDC, although an unnamed official told the Indian Express back in February that it was in &#8220;no hurry&#8221;. The official added that the NDC would reflect India&#8217;s disappointment at the new global climate finance goal for 2035, agreed at COP29 in 2024. India has repeatedly argued that without sufficient climate finance, developing countries cannot be as ambitious as they would like to be in reducing emissions. Some media outlets and analysts were expecting India to announced its NDC at COP30 in November. Instead, the Indian government said only during the summit that it would submit an NDC &#8220;on time&#8221;, with environment minister Bhupender Yadav telling reporters it would be &#8220;by December&#8221;. Argentina sets emissions caps but no NDC The right-wing government of Argentina, which has considered leaving the Paris Agreement, unveiled caps on the country&#8217;s emissions for 2030 and 2035 in an online event on November 3, but has yet to formalise those targets in an NDC. At the event and in subsequent communications with Climate Home News, Undersecretary of the Environment Fernando Brom said the country would present its NDC during the first week of COP30. But that did not happen, although Argentinian negotiators participated in the climate summit. Some local experts have pointed to November&#8217;s trade deal with the US as one of the reasons for the delay in submitting the NDC, while others cited the government&#8217;s disinterest in the climate agenda. In contrast, the governments of Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Vietnam have faced less scrutiny and have not publicly commented on whether and when their NDCs will be released. In August, the Vietnamese government said it was &#8220;actively advancing the update&#8221; of its NDC. The country has a Just Energy Transition partnership with rich nations, but the International Energy Agency predicts coal use will continue to grow there until at least 2030, driven by power-hungry manufacturing. The Philippines government has organised consultation events on its new NDC but has not said when it will be released. The post India, Saudi Arabia and Argentina fail to submit climate plans in 2025 appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/01/02/india-saudi-arabia-and-argentina-fail-to-submit-climate-plans-in-2025/)
