---
layout: feed_item
title: "Attacks on Health Care in Myanmar: 18 - 31 March 2026"
date: 2026-04-10 14:04:22 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['year-2026', 'public-health', 'climate-health']
keywords: ['care', 'public-health', 'year-2026', 'attacks', 'climate-health', 'health']
description: "Country: Myanmar Source: Insecurity Insight Please refer to the attached file"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/myanmar/attacks-health-care-myanmar-18-31-march-2026
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: Myanmar Source: Insecurity Insight Please refer to the attached file. Insecurity Insight identified at least 1901 incidents of violence against or obstruction of health care in Myanmar since the military coup on 01 February 2021 and 16 March 2026. Over 70% of these incidents were attributed to the Myanmar Armed Forces (MAF) and Myanmar police. Health facilities were reportedly damaged or destroyed 488 times, 172 health workers were killed and 909 arrested. These attacks on health care severely undermined the provision of medical services, forcing facilities to close or scale back operations and endangering patients' lives. Violence, aerial and drone strikes, and restrictions on medical supplies disrupted care delivery, causing long-term damage to health systems and the wellbeing of affected populations. View the incidents on our interactive map. Download the data. Updated every Monday and includes information on weapons use, perpetrators and effects. For events descriptions and data enquiries, please get in touch. Numbers may change if or when further information is made available. See here for methodology. Documented incidents 18-31 March 2026 The publicly reported incidents below are not a complete nor a representative list of all incidents that affected the provision of health care between 18-31 March 2026. The incidents below have not been verified through ground investigations. There is a delay in reporting incidents due to our open source verification protocol. 21 March 2026: In Su Lay Kone village and village tract, Kani township, Yinmabin district, Sagaing region, a school building reportedly used as a makeshift hospital by health workers supported by the exile government, a monastery, and nearby houses were severely damaged by bombs dropped from eight Myanmar military fighter jets. The school was closed at the time of the attack. Sources: Khit Thit Media, Maun, Mizzima, and People Media 21 March 2026: In Pakokku town, Pakokku township, Pakokku district, Magway region, a doctor was abducted from a specialist clinic and pharmacy by four armed men, who also took away mobile phones of other staff. The junta officials accused the PDF of the attack. Source: People Media 24 March 2026: On the road from Min Kan village to Chauk town; near Magyi Sauk village, Gway Cho village tract, Chauk township, Chauk district, Magway region, a health assistant and her husband were killed and her daughter injured as a landmine detonated. The junta officials accused the PDF of the attack. Source: Telegram 24 March 2026: In Katha town, Katha township, Katha district, Sagaing region, a hospital and other civilian infrastructure caught fire and were damaged by bombs dropped from five Myanmar military fighter jets. Sources: Kachin News Group, Kachinwaves and Myo Taw 25 March 2026: In Kyauk Htone Gyi village and village tract, Katha township, Katha district, Sagaing region, a station hospital was destroyed by bombs dropped by Myanmar military fighter jets. Sources: Kachin News Group and Kachinwaves 30 March 2026: In Nga Pu Yin village and village tract, Budalin township, Monywa district, Sagaing region, a makeshift hospital was destroyed and three nearby houses were damaged by bombs dropped by two Myanmar military fighter jets. At least seven were killed and 20 were injured. Three female patients, one male patient, and a neonate were amongst those killed and 10 patients amongst those injured. Sources: Democratic Voice of Burma, Mandalay Free Press, Myanmar Now and Western News 30 March 2026: In Oke Shit village, Oke Shit Gyi village tract, Ayadaw township, Monywa district, Sagaing region, a makeshift hospital was damaged by bombs dropped six times by two Myanmar military jets. At least one was killed and three were injured. Patients and health workers had been evacuated just before the attack due to an airstrike of a hospital in a nearby township the same day. Sources: Democratic Voice of Burma and Khit Thit Media Past briefs: 04-17 March; 18 February-03 March; 04-17 February; 21 January-03 February; 07-20 January; 24 December 2025-06 January; 10-23 December; 26 November-09 December; 12-25 November; All SHCC Factsheets: Burmese: 2024; 2023. English: 2024; 2023: 2022; 2021; 2020 Help support the protection of health care by sharing this resource. Please copy and paste this link: https://bit.ly/18-31Mar2026MMRHealth

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/myanmar/attacks-health-care-myanmar-18-31-march-2026)
