---
layout: feed_item
title: "Report: Nevada's lithium boom comes at the expense of Indigenous rights"
date: 2026-05-12 20:55:29 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['year-2026']
keywords: ['nevada', 'report', 'year-2026', 'lithium']
description: "As the Trump administration continues its push to secure critical minerals like lithium, the U"
external_url: https://grist.org/indigenous/report-nevadas-lithium-boom-comes-at-the-expense-of-indigenous-rights/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Grist"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

As the Trump administration continues its push to secure critical minerals like lithium, the U.S. government and private corporations have ignored Indigenous peoples' rights in Nevada. That's according to a report released today by Amnesty International, which is calling for the suspension of federal permits for all lithium mines in the state. The Silver State has emerged as a key source of lithium, the main component in electric vehicle and other batteries. About 85 percent of the country's known reserves are in Nevada, and several Indigenous nations and organizations, alongside environmentalists, have been fighting for years against its extraction and the environmental risks that creates, including water contamination and biodiversity loss. 'This is our land,' said Fermina Stevens, a member of the Te-Moak Tribe of Western Shoshone and the executive director of the Western Shoshone Defense Project. 'We should have a say in what happens. But I know that they don't want us there because Nevada is so rich in all of these minerals.' The three projects Amnesty International highlights in its report are Thacker Pass Lithium Mine, Nevada North Lithium Project, and Rhyolite Ridge Lithium-Boron Project. Each is located primarily on public land that the Western Shoshone and Paiute people consider unceded territory. Thacker Pass is under construction and Rhyolite Ridge is slated to begin construction this year, while Nevada North is in the exploratory phase. Amnesty International's report says all three are violating Indigenous peoples' right to free, prior, and informed consent. That principle, known as FPIC, is an international standard that affirms Indigenous peoples' right to approve or deny projects that impact their land and communities. Although the projects were approved by federal agencies, Amnesty International argues the review processes fell short of FPIC and the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, or UNDRIP. 'They've got to come down on the right side,' Mark Dummett, the organization's head of business and human rights, said of the mining companies. 'They've got to come down on the side of human rights, rather than getting the minerals at all costs.' He added that, regardless of domestic laws in the countries in which they operate, these firms must follow international human rights standards. The report also highlights the impact of the Trump administration's push for deregulation, including fast-tracked permits and limited environmental review, which reduces the ability of Indigenous peoples to offer full consent. In a statement, a spokesperson from the U.S. Department of Interior said, 'The climate crazed activists behind this report are notorious for making baseless claims, repeatedly rejected by courts, as part of their pathetic rage against energy production that is not only bipartisan, but proven to benefit the American people.' They also said that a review of lithium projects in Nevada by the federal Bureau of Land Management included extensive environmental review and opportunity for tribal engagement. Nevada is experiencing a lithium boom that has seen more than 20,000 claims filed. The report also comes amid global resistance by Indigenous peoples to 'green transition' mining that they say comes at the expense of their land and rights. Given the increasing demand for minerals like lithium, cobalt, and copper, Dummett said that mining companies around the world are taking advantage of gaps in regulation and human rights enforcement. 'The way that this mining has always taken place has been incredibly damaging to the environment and people,' Dummett said. 'We don't want to see the mistakes of the past repeated.' Stevens said that although her people have experienced a long history of land theft and abuse by the U.S. government and corporations, consultation has grown even more perfunctory amid the worldwide drive for lithium, which has surged since the war in Iran. 'War and the military complex is all that they can see,' she said. 'And so they're blinded to the things that are sacred, that are more important for human survival. And I just don't think that they care about those things.' Lithium Americas, the owner of the Thacker Pass mine, disputed many of the report's claims in a response submitted to Amnesty International, including inadequate consultation, environmental risks, and violation of Indigenous rights. Its reply also noted that UNDRIP is not binding in the United States, but argued that the project complies with it anyway. 'The Thacker Pass Project has the potential to significantly advance America's electrification efforts, reduce carbon emissions, and strengthen domestic supply chains for critical minerals — strengthening America's energy future. LAC has made stakeholder engagement, including with Tribes, an important part of the development of the Project,' its response reads. A spokesperson for Ioneer, the owner of the Rhyolite Ridge project, said the company 'respectfully but firmly disagrees with the findings released by Amnesty International,' and highlighted the company's engagement with tribes. 'We take great pride in our compliance with all U.S. legal requirements and remain committed to a transparent process that respects tribal sovereignty while delivering a reliable and secure domestic supply of critical minerals,' the spokesperson said. Surge and Evolution, the owners of the Nevada North Lithium Project, did not respond to a request for comment, but in a response to Amnesty International, Evolution said, 'We take all reasonable efforts to conduct proactive and ongoing engagement with Indigenous peoples.' Indigenous leaders said they do not expect the mining companies to change, but will continue the fight to protect their land. 'We can survive without technology, but we can't survive without water,' Stevens said. 'We can't save the Earth through the energy transition while we're simultaneously destroying biodiversity.' This story was originally published by Grist with the headline Report: Nevada's lithium boom comes at the expense of Indigenous rights on May 12, 2026.

[Read original article](https://grist.org/indigenous/report-nevadas-lithium-boom-comes-at-the-expense-of-indigenous-rights/)
