---
layout: feed_item
title: "Drought Parches Florida"
date: 2026-04-07 04:01:00 +0000
categories: [climate_science]
tags: ['agriculture', 'food-security', 'water-crisis', 'renewable-energy', 'urgent', 'wind-power', 'extreme-weather', 'drought', 'wildfires', 'year-2026']
keywords: ['agriculture', 'parches', 'food-security', 'water-crisis', 'urgent', 'renewable-energy', 'florida', 'drought']
description: "NASA Earth Observatory/Lauren Dauphin Florida is among the wettest U"
external_url: https://science.nasa.gov/earth/earth-observatory/drought-parches-florida/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "NASA Science"
feed_category: "climate_science"
---

Shallow groundwater aquifers are driest in northern and central Florida in this map based on observations acquired on March 30, 2026, by the GRACE-FO (Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment Follow-On) satellites.NASA Earth Observatory/Lauren Dauphin Florida is among the wettest U.S. states, but that doesn't mean it is drought-free. Nearly all of Florida faced at least 'moderate' drought, and nearly 80 percent faced 'extreme' conditions in April 2026, according to data from the U.S. Drought Monitor. Unusually dry conditions gripped the state for much of 2025, but the intensity and extent of the drought ratcheted up starting in January 2026. Data from a NASA and German Research Center for Geosciences satellite mission show that the drought has left its imprint on the state's underground water supplies, which are often tapped for drinking water and farming. The map above combines data from the twin GRACE-FO (Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment Follow-On) satellites and ground-based measurements to estimate the relative amount of groundwater stored underground as of March 30, 2026. The colors depict the wetness percentile, or how the amount of shallow groundwater compares to long-term records (1948–2010). Blue areas have more water than usual, and orange and red areas have less. Aquifers in the northern and central regions of the state are particularly dry. The drought is being felt throughout Florida. Some water districts have imposed restrictions on when water can be used for certain activities, such as lawn watering and car washes. News reports suggest that the dry weather poses a threat to crops, many of which already suffered severe damage during hard freezes in February. Large wildland fires have flared up in some areas, and even wetland ecosystems like the Everglades face unusually dry conditions. The 2025-2026 drought is the most severe to affect Florida since 2012, data from the U.S. Drought Monitor show.NASA Earth Observatory / Lauren Dauphin U.S. Drought Monitor records indicate that the current drought is the most widespread and severe to affect the state since 2012. Many areas have received less than half their normal rainfall since September 1, 2025, according to the National Weather Service. St. Petersburg has seen only 7.7 inches (195.6 millimeters) of rain since September 1, compared to the normal 19.0 inches, making this the driest year on record for that period. However, the current drought does not yet rival the worst drought that has parched the state, according to data from the U.S. Drought Monitor. Their analysis indicates that the 2000–2001 drought was more intense, lasted longer, and affected a larger area. GRACE-FO observations are among the sources of information that the U.S. Drought Monitor considers when mapping drought conditions in its weekly assessments. Forecasters anticipate that a slow-moving rainstorm set to hit Florida this week may offer some relief. NASA Earth Observatory images by Lauren Dauphin, using GRACE-FO data from The National Drought Mitigation Center at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. Story by Adam Voiland. Downloads March 30, 2026 JPEG (1.01 MB) References and Resources AccuWeather (2026, April 5) Slow-moving rainstorm to douse Florida drought, wildfire risk this week. Accessed April 6, 2026. Florida Climate Center (2026, February) Climate Summary for Florida. Accessed April 6, 2026. Florida Department of Environmental Protection (2024, December 13) Aquifer Essentials. Accessed April 6, 2026. Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services (2026, February 20) Commissioner Wilton Simpson Announces Recent Freezes Caused Over $3 Billion in Estimated Losses to Florida Agriculture. Accessed April 6, 2026. FOX Business (2026, March 11) Florida drought deepens strain on citrus industry as growers battle costs, disease. Accessed April 6, 2026. FOX Weather (2026, March 25) New Florida water restrictions issued as historic drought intensifies, with little relief expected. Accessed April 6, 2026. Main St. Daily News (2026) Floridan aquifer levels hit lowest since 2011 with little March rain. Accessed April 6, 2026. National Weather Service (2026, April 2) Drought Information Statement for West Central and Southwest Florida. Accessed April 6, 2026. National Weather Service (2026, April 2) Drought Information Statement for Southeast Alabama, Southwest Georgia, and the Florida Panhandle & Big Bend. Accessed April 6, 2026. South Florida Water Management District Groundwater Modeling. Accessed April 6, 2026. Southwest Florida Water Management District (2026, March 24) District Declares Modified Phase III Water Shortage. Accessed April 6, 2026. Tampa Bay Times (2026, March 21) 'Dry to the bone': Drought squeezes Everglades airboat operators. Accessed April 6, 2026. U.S. Drought Monitor (2026, April 2) Florida. Accessed April 6, 2026. WUFT (2026, March 11) North Florida drought strains farmers as dry conditions persist. Accessed April 6, 2026. WUSF (2026, March 24) Stricter outdoor watering restrictions are coming due to ongoing drought. Accessed April 6, 2026. Earth ObservatoryScienceEarth ObservatoryDrought Parches FloridaEarthEarth ObservatoryImage of the DayEO ExplorerTopicsAll TopicsAtmosphereLandHeat & RadiationLife on EarthHuman DimensionsNatural EventsOceansRemote Sensing TechnologySnow & IceWaterMore ContentCollectionsGlobal MapsWorld of ChangeArticlesNotes from the Field BlogEarth Matters BlogBlue Marble: Next GenerationEO KidsMission: BiomesAboutAbout UsSubscribe🛜 RSSContact UsSearch You may also be interested in: Stay up-to-date with the latest content from NASA as we explore the universe and discover more about our home planet. Drought Worsens Across Northern New England 3 min read In late September 2025, a continued lack of rainfall led to stunted vegetation, lowered water levels, and prompted early fall… Article The West Faces Snow Drought 4 min read Very wet—but very warm—weather in the western U.S. has left many mountainous regions looking at substantial snowpack deficits. Article Reservoirs Dwindle in South Texas 3 min read Drought in the Nueces River basin is reducing reservoir levels, leaving residents and industry in the Corpus Christi area facing… Article 1 2 3 4 Next Keep Exploring Discover More from NASA Earth Science Subscribe to Earth Observatory Newsletters Subscribe to the Earth Observatory and get the Earth in your inbox. Earth Observatory Image of the Day NASA's Earth Observatory brings you the Earth, every day, with in-depth stories and stunning imagery. Explore Earth Science Earth Science Data Open access to NASA's archive of Earth science data The post Drought Parches Florida appeared first on NASA Science.

[Read original article](https://science.nasa.gov/earth/earth-observatory/drought-parches-florida/)
