---
layout: feed_item
title: "WFP Angola Annual Country Report 2025"
date: 2026-04-11 16:42:38 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['public-health', 'el-nino', 'weather-patterns', 'year-2025', 'agriculture', 'water-crisis', 'economic-impacts', 'climate-costs', 'food-security', 'drought']
keywords: ['public-health', 'angola', 'el-nino', 'weather-patterns', 'year-2025', 'agriculture', 'annual', 'country']
description: "Country: Angola Source: World Food Programme Please refer to the attached file"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/angola/wfp-angola-annual-country-report-2025
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: Angola Source: World Food Programme Please refer to the attached file. WFP Angola Annual Country Report 2025 In 2025, Angola grappled with climate-induced shocks, global food crises, and public health emergencies. Rising food and fuel prices, combined with limited agricultural labour opportunities heightened vulnerabilities, forced many households to adopt negative coping strategies that undermine long-term food and nutrition security. Despite these challenges, the Government of Angola made notable strides to contain emerging risks while protecting the most vulnerable. These efforts, together with the country's vast natural resources and strategic geographic location, reinforced Angola's position as a key player in the region and fostered economic stability and growth. Against this backdrop, within the framework of its Interim Country Strategic Plan (ICSP) (2020–2026), WFP pursued a twin-track approach: strengthening national institutions, policies, and systems, to advance long-term food security and nutrition priorities, while implementing programmes to address underlying causes and meet the immediate needs of shock-affected populations. In 2025, WFP reached 62,500 people across its activities, with women and girls representing 54 percent of those assisted. While WFP advocated with donors and partners to secure the required resources, severe funding shortfalls compelled WFP to scale down its operations. Against this background, WFP prioritised the most vulnerable populations while integrating resilience-building with its relief interventions, shifting toward more sustainable assistance models. Using its lifecycle approach to combat malnutrition, WFP, in partnership with the Ministry of Health, assisted 13,500 children under five and pregnant and breastfeeding women and girls in drought-affected areas. WFP provided specialised nutritious foods for the management and treatment of acute malnutrition, alongside commodity vouchers. This ensured households with acutely malnourished members received integrated support, improving household food security and treatment outcomes. Monitoring data showed a 90 percent recovery rate — well above the SPHERE standard of 75 percent. In collaboration with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), WFP provided unconditional food transfers to 6,035 refugees from the Democratic Republic of the Congo residing in the Lóvua settlement. Due to funding constraints, WFP was forced to further reduce rations. WFP scaled up its food assistance for assets interventions, reaching approximately 3,300 refugees and host community members. WFP provided skills training, productive inputs, and conditional food assistance to address the basic needs of refugees. These efforts contributed to enhancing self-reliance and promoting social cohesion among refugees and host communities. WFP's food assistance and nutrition programmes were complemented by social and behaviour change communication, reaching more than 42,000 people with health and nutrition messaging to promote lasting changes in nutrition-related knowledge, attitudes, and behaviours. WFP reinforced its role as a key partner of the Government of Angola, and remained committed to enhancing country capacities, working with national and local institutions to support their development pathways. As part of these efforts, WFP, in collaboration with the Government of Angola, scaled up its resilience programming, benefiting approximately 9,800 people through improved access to clean, safe water. The programme also strengthened local value chains and created economic opportunities for 1,400 smallholders affected by the prolonged drought and the El Niño event. Moreover, WFP started a pilot project on sustainable, climate-smart fish farming to promote small-scale operations and expand livelihood opportunities for young people, while long-term food and nutrition security. WFP supported the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MINAGRIF) in developing the National Strategy for the Reconversion of Agrifood Systems (2026–2035). Additionally, the Second National Strategy for Food and Nutrition Security (ENSAN II) was approved by the Council of Ministers in 2025, marking a critical step toward advancing national food and nutrition security goals. WFP facilitated a study visit between Angola and Egypt aimed at showcasing Egypt's experience in establishing and managing strategic grain reserves and improving access to markets for smallholder farmers. A key milestone was the approval by the Council of Ministers of the redesigned national school feeding programme, developed with technical assistance from WFP. This will be crucial for transitioning to a sustainable, home-grown school feeding model. Additionally, WFP facilitated Angola's engagement in the School Meals Coalition, enabling the country to learn from international best practices and access a global network of partners. WFP assisted the Ministry of Health in strengthening governance, leadership, and management of the National Nutrition Programme. As part of the cholera response, WFP conducted trainings for government health staff and provided specialised nutritious foods in Luanda province to support vulnerable populations and strengthen essential service delivery. Furthermore, WFP offered technical guidance to review the Protocol for the Integrated Management of Acute Malnutrition (IMAM) and to develop a national food fortification strategy aimed at addressing micronutrient deficiencies and improving health outcomes. Together with other United Nations (UN) agencies, WFP established an anticipatory action working group to strengthen early warning systems and enhance national preparedness and response to climate-related shocks. As a key enabler of the inter-agency response, WFP provided efficient, high-quality supply chain and on-demand services to the Government of Angola and humanitarian and development actors. Despite operational challenges, WFP supported the timely delivery of life-saving health supplies, thereby ensuring assistance reached remote and underserved populations while strengthening the resilience of the national health system. WFP upheld the principles of 'leaving no one behind' and 'do no harm,' enhancing protection and accountability to safeguard the dignity of people assisted and address the specific needs of women, girls, and other at-risk groups throughout the programme cycle. To address gender disparities, WFP adopted a multi-faceted approach to ensure that its programmes and capacity-building efforts contributed to equitable access and control over resources, economic empowerment, and full participation and equal leadership opportunities for women and girls. WFP made notable progress in integrating nutrition across its programmes, systems, and partnerships, reinforcing its commitment to sustainable food and nutrition security. Through an integrated multisectoral nutrition response, comprising community-level interventions, strategic partnerships, and cross-cutting approaches, WFP contributed to addressing both immediate and longer-term nutrition needs. WFP's ICSP in Angola was extended through June 2026. While the strategic direction was maintained, this extension will allow a smooth transition to a second-generation Country Strategic Plan (CSP) and stronger alignment with national development priorities. WFP's operations relied on support from a diverse donor and partner base, including government donors and private sector partners. Through strategic collaboration with other UN agencies, non-governmental organisations, academia, and local stakeholders, WFP provided coordinated support to the Government of Angola, maximising the reach and impact of its interventions. Looking ahead, WFP will focus on transitioning from short-term relief interventions to long-term, sustainable solutions that strengthen food systems to support the government in achieving its national development priorities while accelerating progress toward sustainable development.

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/angola/wfp-angola-annual-country-report-2025)
