---
layout: feed_item
title: "The World Cup is one wildfire away from an air quality disaster"
date: 2026-06-09 08:45:00 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['public-health', 'pacific-region', 'climate-health', 'el-nino', 'urgent', 'oceania', 'year-2023', 'weather-patterns', 'california', 'wildfires']
keywords: ['public-health', 'pacific-region', 'climate-health', 'el-nino', 'urgent', 'wildfire', 'world', 'away']
description: "Last month, nearly a dozen wildfires erupted across southern California, sending plumes of smoke and particulate matter into the air"
external_url: https://grist.org/extreme-weather/the-world-cup-is-one-wildfire-away-from-an-air-quality-disaster/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Grist"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Last month, nearly a dozen wildfires erupted across southern California, sending plumes of smoke and particulate matter into the air. Public health officials in Los Angeles issued a multiday air quality advisory for the county, warning of 'potential direct smoke impact' and advising everyone who could see or smell smoke to 'avoid unnecessary outdoor exposure and to limit physical exertion.' The red zone on the map included Los Angeles Stadium — also known as SoFi Stadium — one of the venues for the World Cup, soccer's marquee event, which begins on Thursday. Between June 12 and July 10, Los Angeles will host eight games and is expected to draw tens of thousands of fans and scores of players. As dry, hot, conditions persist, more fires are possible and smoke could once again loom over the stadium. The same risk exists for a number of the 15 other World Cup host cities. But, despite the documented health impacts of smoke exposure, FIFA, the international governing body for soccer, doesn't appear to have a plan if the air quality deteriorates. 'FIFA has basically almost done nothing,' said Nicholas Watanabe, a professor of sport and entertainment management at the University of South Carolina. 'They are lagging behind even minor leagues in North America.' The National Women's Soccer League, or NWSL; the Canadian Football League; and the NCAA, which oversees college sports, all have at least some guidelines outlining what to do if the Air Quality Index reaches certain thresholds. Other leagues — from Major League Baseball to the Women's National Basketball Association — have postponed games because of wildfire smoke, notably when plumes spread across Canada and North America in June 2023. The Sandy Fire burned through heavy brush and sent smoke into the air as it moved through California's Simi Valley in May 2026. Justin Sullivan / Getty Images The Air Quality Index, or AQI, a measure of common pollutants in the air, ranges from 0 to 300+, with 'unhealthy' levels starting at 101 and 'very unhealthy' and 'hazardous' warnings after that. Experts say that wildfire smoke often causes spikes that could be harmful to both players and fans. 'They might get a burning throat, a cough, and a headache,' said Mary Johnson, who researches environmental health at Harvard University's T.H. Chan School of Public Health. Some groups can be particularly sensitive, including children, older individuals, and people with respiratory conditions such as asthma. 'Climate-related risks are assessed as part of overall tournament planning and managed in close coordination with host cities, stadium authorities, and national agencies,' FIFA wrote in a statement to Grist. It detailed extensive protocols related to extreme heat, including mandatory water breaks for players (fans, meanwhile, will not be permitted to bring refillable water bottles into stadiums) but didn't mention air quality. It did mention a 'tournament-wide preparedness exercise' for severe weather, without providing further details. The organization did not respond to follow-up questions and declined multiple interview requests. For now, FIFA seems to be betting the air will stay clear. While that gamble could very well pay off, wildfire smoke has become an increasingly common feature of North American summers, raising questions about whether organizers are prepared for conditions that are no longer unusual. 'It's sort of ridiculous that the biggest sporting event in the world doesn't have anything,' said Watanabe, about even a minimum AQI threshold for canceling matches. 'We're one bad Pacific Northwest wildfire away from some very big concerns.' All indicators point to a dangerous 2026 fire season. The National Interagency Fire Center projects that, after a warm winter and with a potentially record-breaking El Niño incoming, large swaths of the West will be at an elevated risk of wildfire this summer. Canadian officials have made similar predictions. Because smoke can blow thousands of miles, it puts virtually all of FIFA's sites at potential risk.'There are very few places in North America that are immune to these effects,' said Dominik Kulakowski, a geographer who studies wildfires at Clark University. He noted that the warning time for smoke events can sometimes be as short as a matter of hours. 'It would make sense for FIFA to think ahead and implement some air quality standards that would trigger some decisions about whether or not to play.' John Quindry, a professor of physiology at the University of Montana, said that, although a lack of a plan likely doesn't mean 'putting people in early graves,' he does think organizers should be prepared. There are things FIFA could do to help mitigate risk from wildfire smoke, he said, ranging from playing at times of days when the air quality tends to be better to postponing or relocating matches. 'You should have a decision tree and algorithm that's baked into the process,' he said, comparing air quality events to thunder storms. 'People certainly call games for lightning and nobody argues with it.' When the AQI hits 101, the air is considered 'unhealthy for sensitive groups' and the NWSL starts to add hydration breaks for players. At 180, which falls into the 'unhealthy' range for everyone, the league starts to consider rescheduling games. Cancellation or postponement is mandatory above 200, when AQI is 'very unhealthy.' The league did not respond to a request to confirm whether this policy, which The New York Times reported in 2023, remains current. But it aligns with guidelines from USA Soccer. The NFL's 2022-2023 game operations manual also says the league 'will be prepared to relocate a game if there is definitive evidence that the AQI will remain consistently above 200 for a significant period of time, including the day of the game being played in the affected stadium.' Once AQI passes 300, the NCAA requires that organizers move events indoors or cancel them. Watanabe said that some of the World Cup venues are enclosed, with modern filtration systems that could help mitigate poor air quality. That includes Mercedes Benz stadium in Atlanta, a city that already experienced bad air quality due to wildfire smoke this year. But many others can't be closed, including those in Los Angeles, Seattle, and Vancouver — all places historically prone to wildfire smoke. Grist reached out to local organizing committees and public health officials in host cities, the U.S. National Soccer Team Players Association, and the White House Task Force for the World Cup. Of the handful of responses, most redirected questions to FIFA. 'There are no specific AQI levels that would automatically trigger suspension of FIFA events,' said James Garrow, a spokesperson for the public health department in Philadelphia, which is a 2026 World Cup site. Instead, he said, the city would monitor air quality and 'consider possible recommendations.' For FIFA, though, the issue is not simply whether wildfire smoke can affect health, but how to balance those risks against the logistical and financial demands of a multiweek global tournament. As Quindry put it: 'There is a lot of money at stake.' Whatever happens at this year's World Cup, Kulakowski said it's only a matter of time before FIFA and other sports leagues are going to have to reckon with a smoky future. 'Having to think about smoke from wildfires and how that affects athletes, athletic ability, and sporting events is a new thing,' he said, but it's becoming an increasingly common issue across North America, Europe, and elsewhere. 'We're seeing wildfires become a larger part of life.' This story was originally published by Grist with the headline The World Cup is one wildfire away from an air quality disaster on Jun 9, 2026.

[Read original article](https://grist.org/extreme-weather/the-world-cup-is-one-wildfire-away-from-an-air-quality-disaster/)
