---
layout: feed_item
title: "UNHCR-IOM Pakistan Flash update # 97 on Arrest and Detention/Flow Monitoring, 15 Sep 2023 to 6 Jun 2026"
date: 2026-06-12 07:03:12 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['climate-migration', 'displacement', 'year-2023']
keywords: ['year-2023', 'climate-migration', 'unhcr', 'pakistan', 'displacement', 'flash']
description: "Countries: Pakistan, Afghanistan Source: UN High Commissioner for Refugees Please refer to the attached Infographic"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/pakistan/unhcr-iom-pakistan-flash-update-97-arrest-and-detentionflow-monitoring-15-sep-2023-6-jun-2026
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Countries: Pakistan, Afghanistan Source: UN High Commissioner for Refugees Please refer to the attached Infographic. INTRODUCTION In response to the Ministry of Interior's (MoI) decision of 26 September 2023 to enact an 'Illegal Foreigners' Repatriation Plan', UNHCR, the UN Refugee Agency and IOM, the UN Migration Agency, have collated their data on the arrest, detention, and deportation of Proof of Registration (PoR) holders, Afghan Citizen Card (ACC) holders, and undocumented Afghan nationals as well as on the outflows of Afghan nationals at the Torkham, Ghulam Khan, Chaman, Badini and Bahramcha border crossing points, to better understand the protection environment and movements of Afghan nationals returning to Afghanistan from Pakistan. In 2025, the Government of Pakistan (GoP) issued several directives impacting Afghan nationals. In January, the GoP announced that Afghan nationals should relocate from Islamabad Capital Territory (ICT) and Rawalpindi, or else face deportation. In April, further announcements indicated the implementation of the second phase of the 'IFRP', targeting ACC holders, in addition to undocumented Afghans. In July, the GoP issued a Statutory Regulation Order (SRO) directing the repatriation/deportation of PoR card holders following the expiry of PoR card validity on 30 June. The GoP later indicated a deadline of 1 September for PoR holders to leave Pakistan, before the start of the repatriation/deportation process. UNHCR issued a press briefing expressing concern regarding the decision and urging the GoP to exempt Afghans with international protection needs, as well as those with particular circumstances or vulnerabilities, from involuntary return. In line with regular Flash Update reporting, this reporting period covers one week; therefore, comparisons with the previous two-weekperiod(due to the Eid break) should be interpretedwith caution. KEY FINDINGS AND LIMITATIONS Prior to 2023, there was no data collected on the arrest and detention of ACC holders or undocumented Afghan nationals. Since January 2023, IOM has started to collect this data. The figures, particularly of undocumented Afghan nationals, should be considered underreported. • During the reporting period (31 May – 6 June) a total of 1,447 Afghan nationals were arrested and detained. This marks a slight resumptionin arrests and detentions, following the Eid holiday period. • Out of all arrests and detentions during the reporting period (31 May – 6 June), ACC holders and undocumented Afghans represented 97% of the total rate of arrest and detentions, and PoR holders represented 3%. • During the reporting period (31 May – 6 June), 51% of the total reported arrests and detentions took place in Balochistan, 28% in Sindh, 9% in Punjab, 6% in KP, and 6% in ICT. • Across Pakistan, the top three districts for arrest and detention between 1 January and 6 June 2026 are Chaghi (Balochistan), Peshawar (KP), and Islamabad (ICT).

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/pakistan/unhcr-iom-pakistan-flash-update-97-arrest-and-detentionflow-monitoring-15-sep-2023-6-jun-2026)
