---
layout: feed_item
title: "After 20 Years, an Agreement to Safeguard the 'High Seas' Takes Force"
date: 2026-01-15 16:00:00 +0000
categories: [social_impact]
tags: ['public-health', 'atlantic-region', 'hurricanes', 'year-2025', 'climate-health']
keywords: ['years', 'public-health', 'atlantic-region', 'agreement', 'after', 'hurricanes', 'year-2025', 'climate-health']
description: "Roughly two-thirds of the ocean lies outside any single country's jurisdiction"
external_url: https://www.wri.org/insights/high-seas-treaty-explainer
is_feed: true
source_feed: "wri.org blog posts"
feed_category: "social_impact"
---

Roughly two-thirds of the ocean lies outside any single country's jurisdiction. These vast waters, known as the \\"high seas,\\" hold huge importance to the health of the planet, housing rich biodiversity and natural resources that are vital for both the climate and economies. Yet a comprehensive framework to govern and safeguard the high seas has been missing — until now.After nearly 20 years of negotiations, governments, ocean advocates and others finally secured a global treaty to protect and sustainably use the ocean areas that lie beyond countries' jurisdictions. The \\"High Seas Treaty\\" — formally known as the Agreement on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction (BBNJ agreement) — was ratified in September 2025 and officially enters into force on Jan. 17, 2026. From this date, ratifying countries are legally bound by the agreement to support conservation and sustainable management of high‑seas biodiversity.While this marks a major milestone, several key aspects of the treaty still need to be ironed out. Detailed compliance and implementation procedures are expected to be finalized at the treaty's first summit — the \\"Conference of Parties,\\" or \\"BBNJ COP\\" — within the next year. These discussions will cover critical issues, like the designation of high seas marine protected areas; how to assess the environmental impacts of ocean activities that happen beyond national jurisdictions; and how to fairly share benefits from marine genetic resources.In the lead-up to this landmark summit and the treaty's full rollout, here's what to know.Why the High Seas Treaty MattersThe ambition of the High Seas Treaty has always been immense. It seeks to facilitate international coordination on activities within Earth's largest public common, covering around half the planet's surface.The high seas host a diverse array of marine life, from microscopic plankton to colossal blue whales. Alongside supporting global fisheries and food security, they are home to valuable natural resources that countries and companies are ever-more eager to explore and exploit. For example, marine genetic materials are increasingly sought after to support pharmaceuticals, biotechnology and other innovations.Without a binding global treaty, the high seas have been governed patchwork style through regional fisheries agreements, shipping conventions, and scattered marine protected areas which cover less than 1% of the high seas. This leaves critical gaps in protecting marine biodiversity and ensuring that developing countries also benefit from discoveries made in international waters.About Sustainable Ocean PlansSustainable Ocean Plans are comprehensive \\"umbrella frameworks\\" that unify all of a country's ocean-related policies, plans and mechanisms and help align them with international frameworks and best practices. All 19 member countries of the Ocean Panel have agreed to producing an SOP. The 100% Alliance is a further collection of coastal and ocean nations that have agreed to implement SOPs, including the Republic of Korea and Panama.The High Seas Treaty will fill regulatory gaps, complement national efforts and enable coordinated conservation measures on the high seas, all of which will be critical for achieving international climate and biodiversity goals. It will also help guide regional cooperation and link seamlessly to countries' sustainable ocean plans, through which 19 nations have pledged to sustainably manage 100% of the ocean areas under their jurisdiction.Together, these measures will come together to create a more cohesive system of ocean stewardship spanning from coastlines to open ocean. The ocean is full of rich natural resources, like genetic material from coral, that countries and companies are looking to use for everything from pharmaceuticals to new technologies. The UN High Seas Treaty will help fill gaps needed to conserve and regulate these resources. Photo by Placebo365 / iStock. What's Included in the High Seas Treaty?In 2023, Parties agreed on four core pillars of the High Seas Treaty:1) Area-based management tools, including marine protected areasThe treaty will create a mechanism to establish area-based management tools, including marine protected areas (MPAs), on the high seas. MPAs are typically clearly defined geographical spaces that are recognized, dedicated and managed, through legal or other effective means, to conserve marine biodiversity and ecosystem integrity.Some MPAs already exist on the high seas. For example, six MPAs were established in the Northeast Atlantic in 2010 with a total area of 286,200 square kilometers (110,502 square miles). The Ross Sea MPA was established in 2016 to protect a total area of 1.5 million square kilometers (600,000 square miles) in the Southern Ocean.The treaty will also establish a pathway for proposing new zones for protection via a consultation process, supported by scientific evidence.2) Marine genetic resourcesThe treaty will establish rules for sharing financial and non-financial benefits from the commercial application of genetic material sourced from high-seas marine organisms, such as bacteria, corals or deep-sea sponges. This material can be used in medicine, cosmetics, food and biotechnology; innovations with huge potential benefits for human health and wellbeing.3) Capacity building and transfer of marine technologyThe High Seas Treaty also supports technology and knowledge sharing — particularly to low-income countries that need these resources to advance conservation and sustainable ocean management and ensure they can participate fully in high-seas governance.4) Environmental impact assessmentsSome countries and companies are proposing activities such as marine carbon dioxide removal approaches in areas beyond national borders. The treaty will create a standard process for these actors to conduct assessments that can be shared transparently and follow international standards.What's Not Included in the Agreement?The High Seas Treaty is designed to work within the parameters of existing legal instruments, frameworks and bodies, such as Regional Fisheries Management Organisations (RFMOs) and existing fisheries agreements. For example, RFMOs will maintain responsibility for setting quotas and fishing rules under their jurisdiction.While the High Seas Treaty will not directly regulate fisheries management, it will shape how fisheries operate on the high seas. This means influencing the environmental standards that fisheries must meet and encouraging a more joined‑up, ecosystem‑based approach to managing ocean resources. This will require closer coordination between fisheries bodies and new High Seas Treaty institutions, along with more data sharing and scientific input.Which Countries Have Ratified the High Seas Treaty?As of Jan. 15, the High Seas Treaty has been ratified by 81 parties, who are now legally bound to it. These are also the only countries that will have a say at the treaty summit (BBJN COP) later this year. Countries that have signed but not yet ratified the treaty are not currently legally required to fulfil its requirements. However, they are committed to refraining from activities that contradict the treaty's objectives.Countries that were among the first to ratify the treaty included island states such as Palau, Cuba and the Maldives; European Union members including France, Portugal and Spain; and other nations, such as Chile, Norway and South Korea. (Track the complete list on the UN website here.) Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European Commission, signs the High Seas Treaty in 2023 as Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez of Spain (right) watches. Photo by the European Commission. What's Next for the High Seas Treaty?The High Seas Treaty coming into force is only the first step toward its implementation. For the treaty to be effective, parties need to agree on a strong underlying framework and governance structures that will support its rollout.Efforts are already underway. The BBNJ Preparatory Commission (PrepCom) is working to shape treaty operations and prepare for the first BBNJ COP (the date of which has yet to be set). Two preparatory meetings were held in April and August 2025 at the UN Headquarters in New York. The final meeting will be held in the same place from March 23-April 2, 2026.These meetings give governments and negotiators an opportunity to develop recommendations that will shape critical elements of the treaty. This includes:Forming governing structures.Outlining the roles and responsibilities of institutions, such as those that provide data and scientific and technical advice.Creating tools and mechanisms to ensure equitable implementation of the treaty.Establishing systems to ensure funding and technical knowledge is distributed so all member states can fully participate.So far, discussions at these meetings have focused on the operational logistics of the treaty's key bodies. This includes the Scientific and Technical Body, which will advise on science, environmental impact assessments and marine protected areas, and the Clearing House Mechanism, which will serve as a hub for sharing data. Discussions have also centred around financial rules and mechanisms to ensure active participation from all willing governments, such that all goals outlined in the treaty can be reached.The last preparatory meeting will aim to see key recommendations finalized, with the intention of bringing these forward and hopefully getting them adopted at the first BBNJ COP. For meaningful implementation of the treaty to begin, is critical that this last meeting is constructive and reaches consensus. Only with the right governing and financial mechanisms in place can the High Seas Treaty go from a landmark agreement to a fully functioning international treaty that protects the global ocean.Management of the ocean needs to be as interconnected as the ocean itself. By connecting national actions with a robust global treaty, the world can ensure a resilient, equitable and thriving ocean for generations to come. This treaty is a milestone in the international drive to protect and sustainably use the ocean as a shared resource. Now, nations must turn this into effective action with a robust management and governance framework.Editor's Note: This article was originally published on June 5, 2025 and updated on Jan. 15, 2026, to reflect the High Seas Treaty coming into force.

[Read original article](https://www.wri.org/insights/high-seas-treaty-explainer)
