---
layout: feed_item
title: "Somalia: Radio Ergo Weekly Feedback Report, Issued: 19 June 2026"
date: 2026-06-19 10:12:35 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['drought', 'public-health', 'climate-health', 'wind-power', 'flooding', 'year-2026', 'extreme-weather', 'renewable-energy', 'water-crisis']
keywords: ['drought', 'public-health', 'climate-health', 'wind-power', 'flooding', 'somalia', 'radio', 'ergo']
description: "Country: Somalia Source: Radio Ergo Please refer to the attached file"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/radio-ergo-weekly-feedback-report-issued-19-june-2026
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: Somalia Source: Radio Ergo Please refer to the attached file. Brief Analysis The calls to Radio Ergo's nationwide feedback platform in the week 11-17 June 2026 reflected continuing mixed conditions of rainfall in some areas, inadequate rain in others, and continued or return to drought in many places. The following summarises the calls by theme. Floods – two callers in Sanag, one stating location as El-afweyn, spoke of flash flooding after rainfall that caused displacement, and loss of property and livestock. They asked for assistance. A caller in Jowhar said people in Middle Shabelle were in fear off the threat of river floods. Health – a caller in Bardera, Gedo, said chikungunya was spreading and they needed medicine to deal with the outbreak. Another caller not mentioning their location said an unknown disease that was causing throat sores and deaths was prevalent, and they needed diagnosis and treatment. Mental health – a female caller said many people were suffering from mental illness after losing their livelihoods. She wanted to know what help they could get. IDPs – a female caller not specifying her location said she was an IDP. Their water taps had been cut off and their children were out of school. She said they faced lack of jobs to support their families hey needed help. She wanted her message to be shared with responders. Livestock – several callers reported diseases causing sickness and deaths among their cows, with symptoms such as throat sores, runny noses, frothing, and losing fur. Another caller said their goats had runny noses and bloated stomachs, and having lost 70 goats to disease they needed help in treating the remaining animals. Rainfall – callers across scattered regions reported good rainfall leading to improved conditions. These include a few in northern regions and a few in central parts. In Hiran region, callers said their crops were growing. One in Jalalaqsi said they were doing well, the river was flowing with abundant water and their farms were thriving. Several in Dinsor and Baidoa, Bay region, noted good rainfall that was helping crops and livestock to recover. Two callers in Lower Shabelle said the rain had cooled the temperatures. Many called from across Gedo and Juba regions reporting rainfall that they said was helping the crops and livestock. Drought – several callers in northern regions complained of continuing drought with water shortages and the need for aid. One caller said they hadn't had rainfall recently and were facing drought conditions. Many pastoralists had migrated to the area and the little resources had been depleted. Among callers from Galmudug, a female caller in Guriel said the Gu seasonal rains were short-lived and they were praying for relief from the drought. Another in Lan-dowdowle said their main concern was water shortage as the rainfall had been inadequate. A caller in Middle Shabelle said their farms remained bare because of the erratic rain patterns, and their livelihoods and children had been impacted. Several called from parts of Lower Shabelle citing little rainfall and crops struggling to grow in the drought conditions. Among them, a female caller in War-mahan said they faced drought conditions and their livestock had died. She said her children were hungry and they were desperate for aid. A caller in Gedo region said they lacked fodder for their livestock, and needed help to save their animals. Others said the temperature was hot and very windy.

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/radio-ergo-weekly-feedback-report-issued-19-june-2026)
