---
layout: feed_item
title: "World: 117.8 million people displaced: an open wound on our shared humanity"
date: 2026-06-11 04:03:04 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['urgent', 'year-2025']
keywords: ['people', 'world', 'urgent', 'year-2025', 'million']
description: "8 million people now violently displaced around the globe would constitute the world's thirteenth largest country by population"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/world/1178-million-people-displaced-open-wound-our-shared-humanity
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Countries: World, Afghanistan, Democratic Republic of the Congo Source: Norwegian Refugee Council Statement by Jan Egeland, Secretary General of the Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC) on the new global displacement figures: 'The number of people who have fled their home because of violence and conflict has nearly tripled over the last 15 years. The 117.8 million people now violently displaced around the globe would constitute the world's thirteenth largest country by population. Larger than Egypt, Germany, or the UK. A human toll of vast proportions, and a collective failure of humanity. 'For the first time in many years, the number of people displaced around the world is lower than the previous year – down from a record high of 123.2 million in 2025. But, this drop in displacement is in large part caused by involuntary return and without the support and services needed to begin to rebuild lives. In Afghanistan, millions were forcibly returned from neighbouring Pakistan and Iran, and in DR Congo some displacement camps were evacuated at gunpoint, sending thousands of families back to homes that no longer exist. 'At the same time millions continued to be uprooted while many more endured protracted crises with no solution in sight. The world continues to fail civilians caught by conflict and violence. 'Such large numbers are almost impossible to comprehend. And as an increasingly nationalistic world becomes increasingly desensitised to what it truly means to be forced to flee home, the gap between decision makers and donors and displaced people continues to widen. This cannot be accepted as the new normal. 'As humanitarians our work is to support displaced people in their hour of greatest need. To provide life-saving aid including clean water and shelter, and then to contribute the tools needed to rebuild life and hope. 'But we cannot do this without a world that is willing to stand up for humanity. We call on each of you to remind those in power why aid is not a luxury, but an essential. We must stand alongside people living through crisis. We must support diplomatic solutions to end crisis, and fund aid to relieve suffering. We must protect civilians and stand up for international humanitarian law. We must all remember our humanity.' Notes to editors: At the end of 2025, an estimated 117.8 million people worldwide were forcibly displaced due to persecution, conflict, and violence. This is down from 123.2 million people at the end of 2024 (UNHCR). At the end of 2010, there were 43.7 million forcibly displaced people worldwide (UNHCR). The newly released global displacement figures can be found on UNHCR's website. According to the latest available data from the World Bank, 117.8 would place displaced people as the 13th largest country including ahead of Egypt (116.5 million), the UK (69.2 million) and Germany (83.5 million). Further information on the trends seen in 2025 is also available here. For more information or to arrange an interview, please contact: NRC global media hotline: media@nrc.no, +47 905 62 329

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/world/1178-million-people-displaced-open-wound-our-shared-humanity)
