---
layout: feed_item
title: "Amid the Iran Conflict, Resilience Must Be the Top Priority"
date: 2026-04-27 16:41:05 +0000
categories: [social_impact]
tags: ['economic-impacts', 'food-security', 'solar-power', 'clean-energy', 'extreme-weather', 'flooding', 'agriculture', 'climate-costs', 'heatwave', 'renewable-energy']
keywords: ['economic-impacts', 'food-security', 'solar-power', 'conflict', 'clean-energy', 'extreme-weather', 'amid', 'iran']
description: "The Iran conflict is entering its ninth week, but the damage it's wrought may last years"
external_url: https://www.wri.org/insights/food-energy-resilience-iran-war
is_feed: true
source_feed: "wri.org blog posts"
feed_category: "social_impact"
---

The Iran conflict is entering its ninth week, but the damage it's wrought may last years.First and foremost is the human toll: lives lost, families displaced, homes and businesses damaged. This tragedy is felt most acutely by those in the Middle East.But beyond regional borders, the Iran conflict touches virtually all countries. The blockade of the Strait of Hormuz — and the 20% of the world's oil and liquefied natural gas (LNG) that pass through it — has spurred a global energy crisis. Oil prices have soared above $100 a barrel. People from Asia to Europe to the U.S. are feeling the effects in the form of higher costs and scarce fuels.Likewise, major food-producing countries in Southeast Asia and Africa are suffering from shortages of fertilizers, fuel and other key agricultural inputs that ship through the Strait of Hormuz. The UN projects that around 45 million more people could face food insecurity by June if the conflict persists.As with any crisis, it's the poor who are hit hardest. The UN estimates that rising food and energy prices paired with weaker economic growth could push more than 32 million people into poverty. Many live in energy-importing developing nations in the Middle East, Africa, Asia and small island developing states.The global ripple effects of what is a fairly localized conflict underscore a hard truth: The systems on which we all rely — energy and food— are highly vulnerable to shocks.This is just as true for war as it is for other systemic shocks, be they trade wars or pandemics, extreme weather or climate change. Our systemic fragility demands a new focus on resilience — both to confront the threats of today and prepare for those of tomorrow. A farmer in Pakistan adjusts a solar panel. Pakistan's recent solar boom has helped shield the country from rising fuel costs associated with the Iran war. Photo by Hussain Warraich/Shutterstock Building a Modern Energy SystemThe current energy crisis is just the most recent example of the risks of a fossil fuel-driven economy.Beyond producing electricity, oil and gas are embedded in virtually all economic sectors, from transport to agriculture to manufacturing. Disruptions like today's energy crisis can therefore be both widespread and enduring. We've seen this before: Russia's invasion of Ukraine triggered a global cost-of-living crisis driven by spiraling fossil fuel prices, a concept known as 'fossilflation.'Wars aren't the only things that drive up fossil fuel prices. Climate-driven shocks like heat waves, cold snaps and extreme weather similarly send fossil fuel prices soaring.Countries are responding to the Iran crisis in different ways. The EU plans to issue more fuel subsidies. Some nations such as Japan, the Philippines and South Korea are temporarily expanding coal production. Others are discouraging driving by reducing public transport fares.These are all necessary short-term fixes. People and economies need stable energy to power their everyday lives. But none are long-term solutions for creating a reliable and affordable energy system.Clean energy and energy efficiency are the most effective paths to true energy security. They bring both ample domestic supply and price stability — two very attractive features at any moment, but especially today.We're already seeing how countries that have made clean energy investments in the past are faring better during today's crisis. Pakistan's recent rooftop solar boom is shielding households from rising fuel costs. Analysis shows that solar has helped the country avoid $12 billion in oil and gas imports even before the Iran conflict began. China has invested hundreds of billions of dollars in renewable energy and electric vehicles over the last two decades. Solar, wind and hydropower now make up nearly 36% of the country's electricity mix, while half of its cars sold last year were electric. This has helped China reduce the need for imported petroleum and natural gas.The economics for clean energy are already there: Renewable energy offers the cheapest generation in most places. New research from the UK Climate Change Committee shows that the cost of reaching net-zero emissions is less than that of a single fossil fuel price shock. It's the logistics that need solving.Governments and businesses can speed the clean energy transition by getting policy and finance pointing in the right direction. That means ending subsidies for fossil fuels; incentivizing energy efficiency, clean power and electric transport; and investing in emerging markets and developing economies — a huge source of the world's growing energy demand that currently receives only 15% of clean energy spending. Women with the Private Afforestation Development Organization (PADO) water young plants in Ghana's Cocoa Belt. Across Africa, farmers are adopting agroforestry to replenish nutrients to the soil and grow their crop yields. Photo by Vision in View/WRI Creating a Sustainable Food FutureThe Iran situation reveals just how interlinked the world's food and energy systems are. The same fuels that power vehicles, homes and businesses also supply farm machinery and transportation, refrigeration and processing of the global food supply. Meanwhile, roughly one-third of the world's fertilizers sail through the Strait of Hormuz. LNG is also a key input for fertilizer production.The same conflict causing an energy crisis therefore is also causing a food one, bringing higher costs for farmers and the threat of food shortages and rising prices for consumers. Urea prices have already increased 40% since the conflict began and nearly doubled in India.Meanwhile, prolonged droughts, unpredictable rainfall and other impacts of climate change continue to threaten food and water systems at the same time they face conflict-related stressors. An impending El Niño and its associated droughts and floods could further upend things.The only logical solution is to make the world's food system strong enough to withstand disruption.In the short-term, governments should support UN hunger relief programs and keep agricultural markets and trade flows open. We simply can't let an energy crisis spiral into widespread food insecurity.But longer-term, the best path forward is to invest in a more sustainable, diversified and resilient food system. That means making fertilizers more efficient, as Brazil and the U.K. have already committed to do. It means reducing the demand for fertilizers in the first place by cutting food waste (a whopping 40% of all food produced globally ultimately goes uneaten) and moving away from biofuels, which unnecessarily use land for energy that could be used for growing food. And it means to sustainable farming.We're already seeing the power of these kinds of practices today. For example, across Africa, smallholder farmers are turning to agroforestry, integrating trees on their farms to naturally replenish soil nutrients, boost crop yields and build resilience to climate change. In Denmark, the country's Green Tripartite Agreement rewards farmers for reducing their fertilizer-driven nitrogen pollution while restoring forests and incentivizing more efficient dairy and pork production. We need more of these approaches to create a food system that works for all people at all times. Workers assemble an electric vehicle. In China, half of all cars sold last year were electric, helping to reduce the country's need for imported petroleum and natural gas. Photo by Ringo Chiu/Shutterstock Long-Term Resilience Requires Making Good Decisions TodayEven if the Iran crisis ends tomorrow, we know more shocks will come. Geopolitical conflicts, trade wars and climate change will continue to stress the very systems on which we all depend unless we begin the hard work of building resilience. That starts with making good decisions today.In the short-term, policymakers need to think about how they can bring immediate relief to their citizens without compromising long-term prosperity. There are good ways and bad ways of doing so. For example, some governments are ramping up coal production to meet pressing energy needs. This is a sensible policy as long as it's both temporary and reversible. Other governments are offering fossil fuel subsidies to offset rising costs. This is an understandable measure, but far more difficult to undo.In the medium-term, countries must continue to push clean energy projects forward. Today's crisis will likely raise the cost of capital, making it harder to access finance and technology, especially in emerging economies. We need to find ways to keep the finance flowing while also removing logistical bottlenecks that slow clean energy development. Countries can more quickly ramp up resilient renewables by streamlining permitting processes, upgrading electrical grids, overcoming siting hurdles and investing in green jobs training to support a clean energy future.And in the long-term, we need to make this a step-change moment. The Iran crisis exposes just how risky our food and energy systems really are. Of course we've known this for some time. Many remember the 1970s oil crisis and a similar narrative emerging around resilience. What we have today that we didn't have then is myriad solutions at our fingertips: robust clean energy technologies, electric vehicles, efficiency measures, and a growing body of research on how to grow more food without destroying the planet in the process.The Iran conflict is rapidly evolving. We don't know how long it will last or what future impacts may be in store. But we already know this: It's imperative to shore up the world's critical food and energy systems. The question is: Will the world's policymakers move beyond short-term reactions and root out systemic risks through long-term resilience?

[Read original article](https://www.wri.org/insights/food-energy-resilience-iran-war)
