---
layout: feed_item
title: "Santa Marta summit kick-starts work on key steps for fossil fuel transition"
date: 2026-04-30 12:45:50 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['year-2026', 'fossil-fuels', 'rainforest', 'oceania', 'public-health', 'cop28', 'amazon', 'emissions', 'urgent', 'economic-impacts']
keywords: ['year-2026', 'fossil-fuels', 'rainforest', 'oceania', 'marta', 'public-health', 'santa', 'summit']
description: "As oil prices spike due to the Iran war, a new diplomatic process launched in Colombia will support a group of 57 countries – among them large fossil-fuel pr..."
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/04/30/santa-marta-summit-kick-starts-work-on-key-steps-for-fossil-fuel-transition/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

As oil prices spike due to the Iran war, a new diplomatic process launched in Colombia will support a group of 57 countries – among them large fossil-fuel producers – interested in designing national roadmaps and a new financial architecture to wean their economies off coal, oil and gas, as well as building a trade system that favours clean energy. The first global conference on transitioning away from fossil fuels wrapped up on Wednesday in the coal-port city of Santa Marta after several days of discussions bringing together ministers, academics, Indigenous and Afro-descendant peoples, green groups, trade unions and business representatives. It offered a space for governments frustrated by last year's failed attempt at COP30 to develop a global roadmap away from fossil fuels to make progress on how to reduce their reliance on hydrocarbons in a fair and carefully planned way, in line with a commitment made at COP28 in Dubai. Large fossil fuel-producing countries have since blocked concrete advances at the UN talks on putting that into practice. The Santa Marta outcomes will feed into a voluntary roadmap being crafted by COP30 hosts Brazil based on inputs from countries and civil society. Santa Marta: Ministers grapple with practicalities of fossil fuel phase-out At Wednesday's closing plenary, Colombian environment minister Irene Vélez Torres announced that a second conference will be held early next year in the Pacific island nation of Tuvalu, co-chaired by Ireland, marking the start of a new policy-making process to run alongside the slower-paced climate COPs. 'For the first time, it demonstrates that it is possible to make a different type of environmental democracy,' Vélez Torres said, adding that improvements can be made to the methodology. Colombia and the Netherlands, which jointly hosted the Santa Marta conference, said three workstreams had been set up to identify concrete ways to reduce fossil fuel dependence and strengthen co-operation between countries. These workstreams are focused on designing national and regional roadmaps away from fossil fuels including coordinating support for implementation; reforming economic and financial architecture by reducing fossil fuel subsidies, unlocking investment and managing debt constraints; and connecting fossil fuel-producing and consuming nations to reshape the international trade system towards decarbonisation and green commerce. A summary report of the conference said governments would receive policy support from a new panel of top scientists specialised in the energy transition, which will help countries develop roadmaps and align them with their national climate action plans (NDCs). During two days of ministerial meetings, France was the first country to announce its own roadmap, which includes targets to end the consumption of coal by 2030, oil by 2045 and fossil gas by 2050 for energy purposes. Dutch climate minister Stientje van Veldhoven said that, while 'nobody is gonna force' governments to implement the anticipated roadmaps, 'these countries came together because they want to transition to a different economy', adding that the conference provides 'safe space for dialogue'. 'The fact that we don't have negotiations here gave us such different dynamics, so the psychology of the Santa Marta conference is something that we will definitely make sure to carry forward,' she told the plenary. Later she said at a press conference that the key was not to negotiate but to 'collaborate'. Call for a fossil fuel treaty Countries gave mostly positive reactions to the conference proceedings and said the general mood had been uplifting. One government delegate from the Dominican Republic even had to fight back tears in the plenary as she thanked the hosts for inspiring the group of assembled countries. While supportive of the Santa Marta discussions, oil-rich Nigeria advocated strongly for a 'managed, just, orderly and equitable' transition away from fossil fuels, warning against any 'sudden closures'. This stance was reflected in the summary report which notes that fossil fuels should 'decline in a managed, fair, and politically viable way'. Apr 25, 2026 Energy Climate scientists call for fossil fuel transition roadmaps A set of scientific policy recommendations and a new expert panel launched in Santa Marta will help governments plot a path away from oil, gas and coal Read more Apr 24, 2026 Comment Why the transition beyond fossil fuels depends on cities and collective action Cities will help identify concrete pathways for an equitable shift to clean energy at the Santa Marta conference, with C40 members aiming to halve their fossil fuel use by 2030 Read more Ghana, another fossil fuel-producing country, said oil and gas remain deeply tied to government revenues which fund public services. Nonetheless, the West African country urged others to join an initiative to negotiate a global 'Fossil Fuel Treaty', which a group of 18 nations called on the conference to endorse. The effort was not included in the Santa Marta workstreams. Felix Wertli, Switzerland's ambassador for the environment, said countries had found potential areas for collaboration around improving electricity grids, energy storage and green investments ahead of this year's COP31 UN climate summit in Türkiye. 'We are confident that this COP could support such a call,' he added. 'Groundbreaking' talks Delegates said Santa Marta had offered a 'more relaxed' and inclusive process than UN negotiations. Government officials met face-to-face in hours-long conversations and interacted with representatives of different social sectors, including Indigenous peoples, cities and academics in closed-door breakout sessions. Panama's climate envoy, Juan Carlos Monterrey, told Climate Home News that, while he had been sceptical of the process at first, it allowed for discussions to 'flow' in a way that COPs do not. 'That is groundbreaking – it is a massive change in how we deal with environmental diplomacy,' he said. EU climate chief Wopke Hoekstra told journalists that the fact that the conference had happened at all just a few months after a tense COP30 was an achievement in itself. UK climate envoy Rachel Kyte also noted that the Santa Marta dialogue 'is a proof of point that we can talk maturely about a really difficult issue'. Comment: Santa Marta marks a new chapter in climate diplomacy Observers also largely praised the conference. Catherine Abreu, director of the International Climate Politics Hub, called it a 'productive space' for discussing the 'stickiest issues' in the energy transition. WWF's Manuel Pulgar Vidal, also a former COP president for Peru, said Santa Marta made 'hope swell into momentum', adding that its urgency must be sustained beyond this one summit. Patricia Suárez, from the Organization of Indigenous Peoples of the Colombian Amazon (OPIAC), said Indigenous peoples were optimistic that the conference had placed 'the urgency of moving away from fossil fuels on the table'. But more concrete measures must follow, she noted, including declaring key rainforest ecosystems as 'fossil fuel exclusion zones'. One area the conference was criticised for overlooking was the health harms caused by fossil fuels through air pollution, extreme heat and other impacts. Jeni Miller, executive director of the Global Climate and Health Alliance, which unites 250 health organisations, said leaders in Santa Marta 'did not address the importance of protecting people's health', which should be put at the centre of the conversation. Influencing UN negotiations Most government officials at the conference recognised the need to grow the 'coalition of the willing' cemented in Santa Marta into a larger network that can influence other spaces such as UN climate negotiations – and its organisers reiterated that the door is open for others countries to join. Dutch minister van Veldhoven told the final plenary that while 'we are here with an immense group in Santa Marta, it is still too small' to fully disentangle the world from fossil fuels. Colombia and the Netherlands did not invite some powerful fossil fuel-producing countries like Russia and the US to the gathering because of their 'openly extractivist' views, and major players in the clean energy sector like China were also left off the list. Comment: Six nations at Santa Marta could shape fossil fuel futures Tuvalu's climate minister, Maina Vakafua Talia, told Climate Home News that big actors like China should be at the table, saying the criteria for invitations could change for the second fossil fuel phase-out conference his country will organise in April 2027. 'If we are missing out the main players in the discussion, then we are moving in a loop,' he said. 'We need to find somehow how we can engage with [them] because there is no point in talking to ourselves.' Claudio Angelo, head of international politics at Brazilian NGO Observatório do Clima, said countries could decide to keep the ball rolling within the UN climate negotiations by presenting formal agenda items on roadmaps away from fossil fuels at the annual Bonn talks in June which set the scene for COPs. Tina Stege, climate envoy from the Marshall Islands, argued 'there is a strong recognition that what we're doing here can complement the COP process and needs to inform that process' – a view backed by other Pacific islands. The post Santa Marta summit kick-starts work on key steps for fossil fuel transition appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/04/30/santa-marta-summit-kick-starts-work-on-key-steps-for-fossil-fuel-transition/)
