---
layout: feed_item
title: "South Sudan Humanitarian Response Situation Report No. 1, as of 16 April 2026"
date: 2026-04-16 17:15:01 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['climate-health', 'flooding', 'year-2026', 'extreme-weather', 'public-health', 'urgent', 'agriculture', 'food-security']
keywords: ['climate-health', 'humanitarian', 'flooding', 'year-2026', 'extreme-weather', 'south', 'public-health', 'sudan']
description: "Country: South Sudan Source: UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Please refer to the attached file"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/south-sudan/south-sudan-humanitarian-response-situation-report-no-1-16-april-2026
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: South Sudan Source: UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Please refer to the attached file. HIGHLIGHTS Nearly 300,000 people have been displaced in Jonglei State and surrounding areas (IOM/DTM), while 1.35 million people have lost access to healthcare following the destruction or looting of 26 health facilities since the conflict escalated. Localized access constraints persist. Authorities continue to deny access to Nyatim in Nyirol County, hosting approximately 30,000 IDPs. The escalation of conflict in Jonglei and Upper Nile States has further worsened the cholera outbreak, threatening progress made toward containment. As of 10 April, 102,105 cases and 1,662 deaths have been reported, with the case fatality rate exceeding the emergency threshold. The Floods Task Force 2026 was activated. The Climate Outlook 2026 predicts heavier rainfalls than in 2015. SITUATION OVERVIEW South Sudan continues to face an unprecedented humanitarian crisis, with needs rising due to conflict, displacement, disease outbreaks, restricted access, and mounting operational constraints. The situation is further compounded by declining donor funding, which continues to constrain the humanitarian partner's ability to respond at scale. Hostilities continued to escalate across parts of Jonglei, Upper Nile and Unity States, with airstrikes and armed clashes reported across the region, including Akobo and Udier in Longochuk County in the past week. On 13 April, armed clashes were reported between SSPDF and opposition groups in Akobo town, which was followed by the SSPDF airstrikes in Nukta and Gakdong villages in Akobo County on the same day. Due to fighting, most civilians who had returned to Akobo town after the town was captured by SSPDF in March 2026 have again fled to Tiergol in Ethiopia; others to neighbouring villages seeking safety. At least 16 humanitarian personnel working with WHO, Oxfam, CRS, Care International and NRC have relocated to Tiergol in Ethiopia for safety reasons. Patterns of displacement remain highly fluid as the scale of targeted areas continues to shift. As of 9 April, according to the IOM/DTM, renewed fighting since December 2025 has displaced nearly 299,400 people, particularly in Jonglei and surrounding areas. An estimated 110,000 people fled to Ethiopia. Repeated displacement continues, with civilians facing high protection risks and limited access to services. The health situation across Jonglei, Upper Nile, and adjacent conflict‑affected areas continues to deteriorate, driven by escalating hostilities, population displacement, access constraints, and repeated disruptions to health service delivery. Recent fighting in Akobo has once again disrupted health services, and rendering recent rapid assessments insufficient to fully capture the current severity of the situation. Across Jonglei State, the destruction and looting of health facilities, critical health workforce shortages, and repeated interruptions to cold chain systems have significantly reduced access to essential health services for approximately 1.35 million people. At least 26 health facilities have reportedly been destroyed or looted since the escalation of the conflict. Cholera transmission remains active, with a geographic shift toward Jonglei and Lakes States, as well as new cases reported in Renk County, Upper Nile State. As of 10 April, over 102,105 cases and 1,662 deaths have been reported, with a case fatality rate above the emergency threshold. The escalation of conflict in Jonglei and Upper Nile States has worsened the cholera outbreak, threatening the progress made to contain. Three years into the crisis in Sudan, over 1.36 million people have arrived in South Sudan as of 14 April. About 917,973 of the arrivals are South Sudanese nationals. They arrive exhausted, malnourished, and with nowhere to go. Basic services are stretched to the limit. On 10 April, humanitarian partners in Renk County reported worsening humanitarian conditions at the Renk Transit Centre, which require urgent, coordinated humanitarian action. On 2 April, the Government and partners reactivated the 2026 National Flood Taskforce, prioritizing early warning systems, pre-positioning, dyke reinforcement, and harmonized triggers ahead of above normal rainfall forecasts. With above normal rainfall forecasted for April–June, partners agreed on early pre-positioning, dyke reinforcement (including urgent works in Fangak and Bentiu), strengthening of early warning systems, harmonizing anticipatory action thresholds, and reactivation of county-level task forces. Cross-border hydrological influences from Uganda, Ethiopia, and Chad were highlighted as increasing risk factors requiring enhanced coordination. HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE IN PRIORITY LOCATIONS Jonglei State HUMANITARIAN IMPACT AND NEEDS From 30 March to 2 April, an Inter-agency Rapid Needs Assessment (IRNA) was conducted in Akobo town and seven surrounding villages in Akobo County. The mission confirmed a severe, multi sectoral humanitarian crisis affecting an estimated 142,000 conflict affected people, including IDPs, host communities, and returnees across Akobo East and Akobo West. Cases of acute watery diarrhoea are reportedly increasing, particularly among children and women in assessed areas. The assessment team observed medicines being recovered and sorted from items scattered across the Akobo hospital compound. The team also observed significant population movement, with an estimated 800 –1,000 people moving daily between Tiergol in Ethiopia and Akobo town. The communities have raised concerns about increasing protection risks faced by women during their daily movement in search of basic needs. These challenges will be further compounded by the planned closure of the UNMISS Temporary Operations Base (TOB) in Akobo on 16 April, which risks creating a security and operational vacuum. Since 30 March, humanitarian access to Nyatim in Nyirol County has remained restricted, preventing assessments and response to an estimated 30,000 IDPs who fled violence in Lankien, Duk County and Pieri in Uror County. Humanitarian partners reported that IDPs are sheltering in dire conditions, with at least 58 deaths reportedly linked to a lack of essential services including food. On 7 April, MSF confirmed the death of one its staff members, while two additional staff are believed to have died as well following the conflict in Lankien. This confirms the status of 26 out of 291 staff members from Lankien in Duk County and Pieri in Uror County who were previously reported missing following conflict. All 291 MSF staff who fled from the two locations are now fully accounted for. HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE Despite growing escalation in hostilities and an increasingly complex operating environment, humanitarian partners have been able to assess needs and scale up assistance to displacement areas. As of 14 April, a World Food Programme (WFP) verification found an estimated 152,070 displaced people and host communities in need of food security and livelihoods support across Duk, Akobo East, Nyirol, Ayod and Uror counties. Beneficiary verification and distribution activities by WFP and its partners OXFAM are ongoing in Pading, Pulturuk, Lankien, Nyambor, Waat, and Riang in Uror and Nyirol counties. In Ayod County, a total of 224.7 metric tonnes of food commodities were distributed to 25,600 people (6,550 females and 6,050 males) at Ayod town and Mogok food distribution points. In Duk County, 611 metric tons of food commodities were distributed to 61,260 people (31,860 females and 29,400 males) across six food distribution sites. In Chuil (Nyirol County), a total of 252.7 metric tons of food commodities were distributed to 25,360 beneficiaries, including both IDPs and host community members while in Uror County, 202.1 metric tons of food commodities were distributed to 23,580 people at three distribution points: Yuai, Pieri, and Motot. In addition, the national NGO John Dau Foundation, through an SSHF funding and with in-kind inputs from FAO are conducting registration and distribution of emergency agriculture and livelihoods kits targeting 4,376 households both Host and IDPs in Duk County. On 9 April, the WFP logistics hub in Bor town dispatched a humanitarian convoy carrying food assistance for distribution in the Greater Pibor Administrative Area (GPAA), with UNMISS force protection. The initial dispatch targets 14,790 vulnerable people. Deliveries are expected to continue over the coming days to reach an estimated 95,000 people, including populations in Likuangole. In Uror County, food deliveries are being conducted using contracted commercial trucks without UNMISS force protection. The response aims to provide two‑month food assistance (April–May 2026) to 108,180 people in host communities and 14,790 internally displaced persons across multiple distribution sites. On 9 April, the Logistics Cluster in Bor town resumed airlifting operations of shelter and non‑food items (S/NFIs) and water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) supplies to support humanitarian response efforts in Nyirol County. S/NFI response supplies, targeting 18,000 people (3,000 households) in Kurmayom, Dini, Unagat, and Chuil Centre in Nyirol County will be delivered for distribution by Community Initiative for Development Organisation (CIDO), a national NGO. In addition, WASH supplies have been released to the Logistics Cluster for airlifting to Chuil Centre. This intervention targets approximately 12,000 people in Chuil Centre and surrounding IDP settlements. On 9 April, Lutheran World Federation (LWF), based in Panyagor, Twic East County, completed multi‑purpose cash distributions for food to more than 5,800 people (977 households) in Twic East County and 5,800 people (976 households) in Duk County. It also reported completing multi‑purpose cash assistance for non-food items and shelter construction to 1,400 households in Twic East County and 1,400 households in Duk County. Since January, the World Health Organization (WHO) delivered 35.42 metric tons of emergency medical supplies worth US$1.32 million, including 21.81 metric tonnes valued at US$710,969 to Jonglei State. This followed 95 requests from 20 implementing partners covering Jonglei. IOM is supporting emergency primary health care through a mobile clinic in Yuai Primary Health Care Centre, establishment of four Oral Rehydration Points and provision of cholera supplies in Modit-Pathai, relocation of Primary Health Care Units and expansion of outreach and the Expanded Programme on Immunization (EPI) services in Canal/Pigi and Tonj East counties. GAPS AND CHALLENGES Local authorities indicate severe food and service shortages in unreached areas of Nyirol County (Nyatim, Pading, Lankien, Pulturuk, Nyambor, Riang and Waat), affecting host communities and displaced people. Insecurity continues to restrict humanitarian access, movement of supplies, partner presence and return of displaced health workers in Akobo, Nyirol, Ayod, Uror, Nasir, Ulang and other frontline areas. While limited humanitarian access has been granted to some parts of Nyirol County, access to Nyatim, Nyirol County, where at least 30,000 displaced people require assistance is still being denied by authorities. The issue has been escalated to the access working group. The core pipeline, managed by IOM, is facing major delays due to prolonged tax exemption processing, now exceeding 8 weeks compared to 3–4 weeks before 2025. New online systems, administrative changes, and repeated resubmissions involving the Revenue Authority and Ministry of Finance have stalled clearances. Around 535 tonnes of WASH and SNFI supplies, affecting 575,140 people (95,857 households), have been delayed across Unity, Upper Nile, Eastern Equatoria, Northern Bahr el Ghazal, Warrap, Jonglei, Abyei, and Western Equatoria, including priority counties such as Pariang, Renk, Maban, Rubkona, Mayendit, Panyijiar, Aweil East, Twic, Panyikang, Pibor, Malakal, Leer, Fangak, Pigi Canal, Fashoda, Ibba, Mundri East/West, and Tambura. Delays disrupt flood season pre-positioning, reduce stock levels, and hinder emergency rapid response mechanisms and lifesaving responses for rising cholera, hepatitis E, malnutrition cases as well as new displacements. Destruction, looting and damage of WASH infrastructures such as hand pumps, sanitation facilities and water storage facilities has reduced services at household level. The latest resurgence of fighting between armed forces in Akobo, has reduced confidence in previous rapid assessments and rendered the situation unclear. Funding shortfalls, logistics constraints, and weak service continuity in hard-to-reach areas limit the scale and timeliness of the health response. Upper Nile State HUMANITARIAN IMPACT AND NEEDS According to local authorities, about 17,000 people require humanitarian assistance in Kurmuot One Payam, Ulang County. The affected population includes approximately 9,200 returnees and 7,550 internally displaced persons (IDPs). Communities have not received any food assistance since beneficiary verification was conducted in November 2025, leaving urgent needs unmet. Since January 2026, at least 26 people mostly elderly have died at the Renk transit centre, as reported by the Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development (ACTED) on 27 March. An inter‑cluster assessment conducted on 1 April identified the main causes of death as severe malnutrition, including hypoglycaemia, dehydration, anaemia and acute shortages of medical supplies and drugs. The Centre currently hosts over 8,000 people, primarily returnees, who need urgent assistance. A recent survey indicates that more than half the people in the transit centre would voluntarily return to their areas of origin if provided with transportation assistance. A critical health service gap has emerged in Maiwut County Headquarters following the exit of Samaritan's Purse at the end of March 2026, leaving communities with no access to basic healthcare services. This is likely to increase the risk of untreated illnesses, disease outbreaks, and preventable mortality. On 10 April, the Commissioner for Longochuk County reported that an estimated 17,000 people have been displaced across at least six payams in SPLA iO controlled areas due to the conflict in Udier Payam and are in urgent need of assistance. In response, WFP deployed an assessment mission to Mathiang and Udier on 10 April to verify needs and inform potential interventions. New cholera cases have risen in Renk, with 10 new cases reported. Overcrowding at the Transit Centre and unplanned settlement patterns among IDPs and returnees have significantly heightened the risk of rapid disease spread if urgent action is not taken. HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE Since January 2026, WHO has delivered 13.61 metric tonnes of medical emergency supplies valued at over US$610,000 to Upper Nile State, following requests from implementing partners in the State. As of 8 April, 156 war-wounded cases had been received, with 32 patients currently admitted and managed by MSF Belgium. ICRC also deployed a team to Renk County to support response efforts. According to WHO, 19 of these patients were received between 1 and 7 April Humanitarian partners in Renk are concerned that the continuous inflow of the war-wounded patients in Renk will drain the already limited medical supplies in the hospital. Health partners including GOAL, MSF, Relief International, Universal Network for Knowledge and Empowerment Agency (UNKEA), Agency for Child Relief Aid (ACRA) and Solidarity International; and IMC continue to deliver health services and rehabilitate facilities, preposition supplies, as well as strengthening of referrals, and deployment of integrated mobile outreach teams in Ulang, Canal/Pigi, Malakal and Fashoda counties. GAPS AND CHALLENGES On 8 April, the Ulang County Commissioner issued a letter instructing all humanitarian partners to vacate Barmach Payam and relocate to Ulang County within 72 hours. OCHA escalated the issue to the Access Working Group, which met with the State Governor in Nasir County and pushed the deadline. OCHA also informed the Relief and Rehabilitation Commission (RRC) and Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster Management, and on 15 April the OCHA Head of Office and some Member States met with the Deputy Governor in Malakal to reinforce the importance of assisting vulnerable people wherever they are regardless of who controls the area and to advocate for revocation of the instructions issued by the County Commissioners in Nasir and Ulang. Unity State and Ruweng Administrative Area HUMANITARIAN IMPACT AND NEEDS In Unity State, humanitarian conditions are deteriorating amid growing hunger, protection concerns, and access constraints. Local authorities in Panyijiar County reported several deaths suspected to be linked to starvation across 12 villages, with communities resorting to extreme coping strategies. Early rains have already rendered key roads impassable, disrupting humanitarian missions to Koch, Leer, Mayendit, and Adok, and limiting pre-positioning. Political reshuffles at the State and county levels have raised concerns about community acceptance and local governance credibility, particularly in counties with past histories of violence. Funding cuts have forced service reductions, including the closure of seven World Relief health facilities. A recent Inter‑Agency Rapid Needs Assessment and reports from the Relief and Rehabilitation Commission (RRC) indicate large‑scale displacement following the March 2026 attack on Abiemnhom. An estimated 7,444 people (1,486 households) fled to Twic and Gogrial West, while a further 20,485 people (4,097 households) were displaced to the Abyei Youth Centre and Agok/Juoljok. These figures have not yet been verified by IOM/DTM team. Displaced populations in Abyei and Twic have remained displaced for nearly two months, with minimal access to livelihoods, limited coping capacity, and a high dependency on humanitarian assistance. Vulnerability is particularly acute among female‑headed households and households without adult men, who lack access to casual labour opportunities available through host communities. At the same time, access to livestock herding has significantly declined due to ongoing insecurity. Recent reports suggest that while some populations have remained in Abiemnhom County, others have begun gradual and partial returns to assess damaged properties and livelihoods, supported by limited non‑food item assistance. However, market destruction, loss of assets, and persistent insecurity continue to constrain recovery efforts, indicating that returns remain fragile and are highly dependent on improved security conditions and sustained humanitarian support. HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE Verification and registration exercise by WFP and its partner targeting nearly 20,500 displaced people in Abyei is ongoing for two-month food assistance. An international NGO (Save the Children International) has completed registration and verification of 1,331 IDP households from Abiemnhom, in Miakol IDP settlement in Abyei Administrative Area with one off distribution scheduled for 20 April. The Norwegian Refugee Council has completed registration of 1,600 IDP households in Juoljok and is planning a one-off cash distribution to enable them to meet their basic needs FAO in collaboration with the State Ministry of Agriculture supported the establishment of two livestock water yards in Miabek and Nai Nai and repaired two out of three tractors planned for maintenance. The Norwegian Refugee Council has completed registration of 1,600 IDP households in Juoljok and is planning a one-off cash distribution to enable them to meet their basic needs. The UN Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) in collaboration with the State Ministry of Agriculture, supported the establishment of two livestock water yards in Miabek and Nai Nai and repaired two out of three tractors planned for maintenance. From 25 to 30 March, an inter-agency team conducted a mission to Abiemnhom to support conflict-affected communities. During the mission, more than 3,300 people were registered and provided with non-food items, including soap and clothing but are also in need of food assistance. GAPS AND CHALLENGES Limited response in Twic and Abiemnhom remains a challenge. Funding constraints for most Food Security and Livelihoods Cluster partners to provide immediate assistance. Delays in response due to internal approval processes. Cholera and other diseases outbreaks HUMANITARIAN IMPACT AND NEEDS Update on Cholera Between 1 and 7 April, a total of 316 new cholera cases and 1 death (Case Fatality Rate 0.3%) were reported across nine counties. Most cases came from Mayom (184), Ayod (46), Panyijiar (36), Yirol East (15), Duk (14), Renk (10), Uror (7), Awerial (3), and Bor South (1). The single death occurred in Panyijiar and involved a severely dehydrated community case. In Awerial, one of the three new cases was from the Tomrok internally displaced peoples (IDP) camp. The outbreak has shifted geographically toward Jonglei and Lakes states, driven by displacement, flooding, and poor WASH conditions, particularly in internally displaced persons camps. Renk County has reported a resurgence after three months with no cases, recording 10 new cases this week, including six refugees and returnees. Cumulatively, 102,105 cases and 1,662 deaths (CFR 1.6 per cent) across 55 counties in nine states, and all 3 administrative areas have been recorded since the outbreak was declared in September 2024. Pre-campaign activities in Panyijiar County are complete, with vaccination expected to start on 13 April. The International Coordinating Group has approved 359,379 Oral Cholera Vaccine doses for affected payams in Ayod and Bor South counties in Jonglei State, and Awerial County in Lakes State, and recommended maintaining 177,055 doses as in-country buffer stock (prioritizing older doses for mop up campaigns). Outbreaks across the country are exacerbated by displacement, poor WASH conditions, malnutrition, and lack of access to clean water and healthcare, and the destruction of health facilities due to conflict. Update on Mpox: An active and increasing transmission of the Mpox virus cases has been reported nationwide. Between 1 and 7 April, a total of 21 new suspected Mpox cases were reported. Of these, 2 cases were reported from Juba (Central Equatoria State), while 19 cases were reported from Western Equatoria State, including Ezo (8 cases) and Yambio (11 cases). Cumulatively, 573 suspected Mpox cases have been reported nationwide, of which 53 cases have been laboratory‑confirmed. Two deaths have been reported among confirmed cases, resulting in a case fatality ratio (CFR) of 3.8 per cent. Confirmed cases continue to be reported from Juba, Yambio, Ezo, Tambura, Rumbek Centre, Rumbek East, and Malakal. Ongoing active local transmission is evident in Juba, Ezo, Tambura, and Yambio, indicating sustained community transmission and underscoring the need for continued intensified public health response efforts. HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE Deployment of the Oral Cholera Vaccination (OCV) has been completed in 46 counties, resulting in 8,738,328 cholera vaccinations (87.5 per cent coverage). Of these, 47 per cent are males and 53 per cent are females. OCV mop-up campaigns have been completed in 14 counties, reaching an additional 329,701 of the targeted 379,701 (87.6 per cent), as a strategy for accelerating interruption of cholera transmission. WHO and partners are continuing the cholera response through OCV activities and supply support; 270 cartons of assorted cholera supplies were provided between January and April 2026, and OCV activities in Duk, Yirol East and Panyijiar targeting 136,995 people. 100,374 of the cases (98. 3 per cent) are fully recovered and discharged, while 69 cases are reported as still admitted at various Cholera Treatment Centres/Cholera Treatment Units in the counties still reporting new cases. WASH cholera response activities are ongoing across multiple affected locations, including Yirol East and West, Abyei, Abiemnhom, Ayod, Nyirol, Uror, Duk, Akobo, Ulang, Renk, Mayom, Rubkona, Awerial, Twic, and Panyijiar. Phase one of the responses has been partially completed in Mingkaman. Interventions focus on improving access to safe water, sanitation, and hygiene services to prevent and control the spread of cholera. In Yirol East County, Lakes State, an estimated 17,800 people (1,584 households) received WASH non‑food items and hygiene promotion messages. At least 26 hand pumps were repaired or rehabilitated, improving access to safe drinking water for approximately 13,000 people. In addition, two stances of latrines and four stances of bathing shelters were constructed at health facilities, benefiting about 400 individuals, alongside the installation of four handwashing stations to strengthen infection prevention and control (IPC) measures. In Duk County, approximately 1,000 households received WASH non‑food items, eight hand pumps were repaired, and over 9,100 people were reached with hygiene promotion messages on cholera. The WASH Cluster has also completed construction of six stances of latrines, with four stances of bathing shelters currently under construction at health facilities. Additionally, four handwashing stations were installed to promote proper hygiene practices. IOM reported the completion of WASH response activities in Uror County, including the rehabilitation of 15 hand pumps and the delivery of hygiene promotion messages on cholera to 2,200 households. Ongoing water treatment activities in Mingkaman are providing safe water to approximately 5,000 people. In Western Bahr el Ghazal State, Solidarités International reported the completion of a full WASH emergency response in Gedi following conflict‑related displacement. Out of a caseload of 5,185 households, 1,600 households received WASH non‑food items, while hygiene promotion activities reached 7,496 people. In addition, 500 dignity kits were distributed to support women and girls. Two international NGOs (Medair and CMMB) have been deployed in Ezo and Yambio counties where most of the cases have been reported, to support the Mpox response. The County Rapid Response Teams have been activated and are conducting active surveillance and field tracing of the identified contacts, in addition to their routine active search for suspected cases in the community and health service delivery points. GAPS AND CHALLENGES Strengthening disease surveillance and reporting systems nationwide, with priority focus on conflict‑affected and newly accessible areas where the presence of health staff is limited or absent. This will include enhanced support for community‑based surveillance, deployment of surge surveillance capacity, restoration of reporting from disrupted health facilities, and the provision of essential tools, connectivity, and training to improve the early detection, verification, and reporting of outbreaks and other public health events. Equatoria region HUMANITARIAN IMPACT AND NEEDS Due to armed clashes between the South Sudan People's Defence Forces (SSPDF) and the Sudan People's Liberation Army in Opposition (SPLA-iO), alongside intercommunal violence in Western Equatoria State between September and November 2025, more than 225,000 people across Ibba, Mundri East, Mundri West, Ezo, Nagero and Tambura counties have been displaced according to the Relief and Rehabilitation Commission (RRC) and through an Inter-Agency Rapid Needs Assessment (IRNA) mission. Despite initial access constraints, humanitarian partners have scaled up response efforts, supported by a US$4 million allocation from the South Sudan Humanitarian Fund in December 2025 to deliver life-saving assistance. On 8 April, clashes between SSPDF and SPLA iO groups were reported in Kapaile Payam, Wau County in Western Bahr el Ghazal State. Preliminary information indicates that hundreds of civilians including people previously displaced from Nagero in Western Equatoria State fled to nearby Bazia town to seek safety. In Central Equatoria State, the Education sector continues to face critical needs affecting access, retention, and learning outcomes. The most urgent priorities include safe learning environments, teaching and learning materials, teacher capacity and motivation and inclusive education services. HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE As of 14 April, humanitarian partners delivered emergency support through the Emergency Rapid Response Mechanism, including shelter and non-food items to over 23,000 internally displaced people (IDPs) in Mundri West County, alongside market assessments for potential cash-based food security and WASH interventions. The International Committee of the Red Cross provided food assistance to about 10,200 IDPs in Mundri East, while partners in Ezo County reached approximately 31,600 people with a mix of WASH services, cash assistance, food, shelter, and NFIs. The Norwegian Refugee Council supported displaced households from Nagero with shelter materials, cash, and legal assistance, and Médecins Sans Frontières deployed a response team to Nagero County. ICRC is planning a one-off food and non-food items response, but the planned intervention will cover only a limited number of beneficiaries. Most FSL Cluster partners lack allocated contingency funding to address the current needs; available resources are largely earmarked for regular programming (resilience and development), with limited flexibility to respond to sudden shocks or new displacement. In Mundri East and Mundri West counties, four boreholes were rehabilitated, improving access to safe drinking water for approximately 2,000 people. Community Hygiene Promoters were trained and deployed to conduct hygiene promotion campaigns focusing on handwashing, safe water use, latrine maintenance, waste management, and personal hygiene. An international NGO delivered life‑saving WASH non‑food items to more than 13,100 people (2,194 households) across both counties. In addition, five of the ten planned latrine blocks were constructed, providing sanitation services for approximately 10,000 people. Furthermore, ten of the twenty targeted hand pumps were rehabilitated, restoring access to safe water for an estimated 5,000 people. In Central Equatoria State, a national NGO, Community Aid for Humanitarian Organization (CAHO), strengthened the capacity of 20 teachers and 10 teaching assistants through training on inclusive education, learner‑centered methods, and classroom management in Terekeka, Rego, Muni, and Nyori Payams in Terekeka County. CAHO also conducted school‑based awareness sessions on girls' education, retention, and child protection; facilitated community meetings with education stakeholders to identify barriers to attendance; and carried out monitoring and supportive supervision visits to assess school functionality and provide on‑the‑spot teacher coaching. GAPS AND CHALLENGES Tax exemption clearance delays remain a major issue to allow supplies deliveries for the core pipeline to the country hence impacting short term projects, rapidity of response and disruption of pre-positioning of supplies. Conflict remains active in Western Equatoria State, recently over 10,000 people were displaced due to cattle raiding conflict in Mundri East to Minga in Central Equatoria state. Population remained unserved in Nagero due to access issues. COORDINATION AND FUNDING The Humanitarian Coordinator maintained close engagement with national authorities, Humanitarian Country Team members, Heads of Missions and key partners through bilateral exchanges and coordination fora, highlighting protection concerns, and access constraints issues. At the state level, the Inter-Cluster Coordination Groups continued to support coordination of needs assessment and response activities and contributed to the identification of gaps in service coverage and access. Efforts to strengthen linkages between national and sub- national coordination structures continued to support responsive efforts. Contingency stocks are being rapidly depleted, with limited prospects for replenishment due to access restrictions, insufficient funding, escalating demand, and ongoing disruptions to supply chains, particularly in hard‑to‑reach areas where access remains restricted. Without additional funding, partners face mounting difficulties in scaling up and sustaining the humanitarian response across sectors. The 2026 Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan (HNRP) is currently 22 per cent funded as of 15 April.

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/south-sudan/south-sudan-humanitarian-response-situation-report-no-1-16-april-2026)
