---
layout: feed_item
title: "Analysis: UK's EV drivers are now saving £1,100 each a year – and £3bn in total"
date: 2026-06-15 15:26:38 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['year-2026', 'urgent', 'solar-power', 'clean-energy', 'wind-power', 'renewable-energy']
keywords: ['saving', 'year-2026', 'urgent', 'analysis', 'solar-power', 'clean-energy', 'wind-power', 'drivers']
description: "Amid reports that the government could weaken the UK's electric vehicle (EV) targets, Carbon Brief analysis reveals the nation's EV drivers are saving more t..."
external_url: https://www.carbonbrief.org/analysis-uks-ev-drivers-are-now-saving-1100-each-a-year-and-3bn-in-total/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Carbon Brief"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Amid reports that the government could weaken the UK's electric vehicle (EV) targets, Carbon Brief analysis reveals the nation's EV drivers are saving more than £1,100 a year in fuel costs, compared with running a petrol car. Battery EVs (BEVs) are roughly four times more efficient than combustion-engine cars, making them far cheaper to run – particularly since the Iran crisis caused a spike in fossil-fuel prices. The savings from driving BEVs are also more than three times higher than for 'plug-in' hybrids (PHEVs), which evidence shows are mostly driven with their combustion engines. In total, the more than 2m BEVs, 1m PHEVs and 100,000 electric vans on UK roads are saving drivers around £3bn a year, Carbon Brief's analysis shows, as illustrated in the figure below. In addition, these EVs are avoiding the need for nearly 2.5bn litres of fuel and cutting carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions by nearly 7m tonnes each year. Total annual fuel cost savings from the UK's fleet of battery EVs, plug-in hybrids and electric vans, £bn. Figures for 2026 based on EVs on the road as of May 2026 and the latest road fuel prices. Analysis based on 80% home charging at cheap overnight rates and 20% public charging. Savings can reach £1,400 a year with exclusive home charging. Source: Carbon Brief analysis. Despite recent news that EVs are now cheaper to buy than petrol cars, as well as having far lower running costs, BBC News says the government is 'set to water down' its EV sales targets. The broadcaster explains that the current goal, under the UK's 'zero-emissions vehicle' (ZEV) mandate, is for 80% of new car sales to be BEVs by 2030. It says that the government is set to consult on weakening this to between 50% and 70%, following 'lobbying' by carmakers and trade unions. According to the Sunday Times, prime minister Keir Starmer 'is understood to have overruled the energy secretary [Ed Miliband] after sustained pressure from industry, the Unite union and Peter Kyle, the business secretary'. The car industry has consistently claimed there is insufficient demand for BEVs to meet the targets under the ZEV mandate, yet the government says manufacturers have 'over-complied' to date. Independent analysts say the industry is on track to continue beating the ZEV mandate goals. The industry has been able to beat its targets by using a wide range of 'flexibilities', which were introduced after a previous round of lobbying. These allow carmarkers to meet part of their EV targets by selling more efficient combustion cars, such as hybrids and plug-in hybrids. The ZEV mandate is the single-largest part of the government's plans to meet its legally binding climate goals over the next decade. The advisory Climate Change Committee (CCC) previously warned that the extra flexibilities would result in a larger number of hybrids being sold, at the expense of battery EVs. When it consulted on the ZEV mandate in 2023, the then-Conservative government noted that PHEVs do not deliver the cost and CO2 savings they are advertised with. It pointed to 'dramatic' differences between the performance of PHEVs in test cycles and what they deliver under real-world conditions. In practice, less than a third of miles driven in PHEVs are fuelled by electricity, with petrol making up the rest. As a result, cost and CO2 savings from BEVs are three times larger than for PHEVs. Analysis: Solar overtakes gas power in Asia for first time ever Renewables | 12.06.26 Analysis: Wind and solar have saved UK from gas imports worth £1.7bn since Iran war began Renewables | 07.05.26 Q&A: How the UK government aims to 'break link between gas and electricity prices' Renewables | 21.04.26 Clean energy pushes fossil-fuel power into reverse for 'first time ever' Renewables | 21.04.26 The post Analysis: UK's EV drivers are now saving £1,100 each a year – and £3bn in total appeared first on Carbon Brief.

[Read original article](https://www.carbonbrief.org/analysis-uks-ev-drivers-are-now-saving-1100-each-a-year-and-3bn-in-total/)
