---
layout: feed_item
title: "IPCC at the 2026 June Climate Meetings"
date: 2026-06-05 15:22:05 +0000
categories: [climate_science]
tags: ['year-2026', 'ipcc', 'climate-summit', 'cop28', 'climate-science', 'ccs', 'carbon-capture']
keywords: ['year-2026', 'ipcc', 'cop28', 'climate-summit', 'june', 'climate-science', 'climate']
description: "The meetings are taking place in Bonn, Germany, from 8 to 18 June 2026"
external_url: https://www.ipcc.ch/2026/06/05/ipcc-at-sb64-unfccc/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "IPCC"
feed_category: "climate_science"
---

GENEVA, June 5 – The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) will participate in the 64th session of the Subsidiary Bodies (SBs) of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), also known as the June Climate Meetings. The meetings are taking place in Bonn, Germany, from 8 to 18 June 2026. The IPCC Chair, Jim Skea, will address the opening of the 18th Research Dialogue on 9 June. In his remarks, the Chair will provide an update on the progress of the seventh assessment cycle and cover some of the topics of this year's Research Dialogue, including advances in climate models and scenarios, the assessment of adaptation effectiveness, and the integration of Indigenous and local knowledge in the IPCC assessment process. Working Group II Co-Chair Prof. Bart van den Hurkand Working Group II Vice-Chair Cromwel Lukorito will deliver interventions at the plenary session of the Research Dialogue. Their interventions, respectively, will focus on pathways for accelerating sectoral transformation across national and regional contexts and sustainable development needs; and on understanding major transboundary, cascading and compounding climate risks. IPCC Vice-Chair Diana Ürge-Vorsatz will take part as a panelist in the Expert Dialogue on gender and age disaggregated data and gender analysis in the context of climate change. On the opening day of the conference, 8 June, the Deputy Secretary of the IPCC Ermira Fida will deliver a statement on behalf of the IPCC, during the joint opening plenary session. On 10 and 11 June 2026, the IPCC will hold two side events; the first will look at the progress on the AR7 and the key cross-cutting topics of Expert Meetings and Workshops, while the second side event will focus on the launch of the report from the IPCC Workshop on Engaging Diverse Knowledge Systems held at the University of Reading, UK, in February this year. In addition to these, IPCC experts will also be actively participating in other events and activities during the conference. Further details about the events in this media advisory and other activities involving the IPCC will be available here. For interview requests with the IPCC experts attending the 64th session of the Subsidiary Bodies in Bonn, please email ipcc-media@wmo.int. For more information contact:IPCC Press Office, Email: ipcc-media@wmo.intAndrej Mahecic, +41 22 730 8516 or Werani Zabula, +41 22 730 8120 Notes for editors What is the IPCC? The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is the UN body for assessing the science related to climate change. It was established by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) in 1988 to provide political leaders with periodic scientific assessments concerning climate change, its implications and risks, as well as to put forward adaptation and mitigation strategies. In the same year the UN General Assembly endorsed the action by the WMO and UNEP in jointly establishing the IPCC. It has 195 member states. Thousands of people from all over the world contribute to the work of the IPCC. For the assessment reports, experts volunteer their time as IPCC authors to assess the thousands of scientific papers published each year to provide a comprehensive summary of what is known about the drivers of climate change, its impacts and future risks, and how adaptation and mitigation can reduce those risks. The IPCC has three working groups: Working Group I, dealing with the physical science basis of climate change; Working Group II, dealing with impacts, adaptation and vulnerability; and Working Group III, dealing with the mitigation of climate change. It also has a Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories that develops methodologies for measuring emissions and removals. IPCC assessments provide governments, at all levels, with scientific information that they can use to develop climate policies. IPCC assessments are a key input into the international negotiations to tackle climate change. IPCC reports are drafted and reviewed in several stages, thus guaranteeing objectivity and transparency. About the Seventh Assessment Cycle Comprehensive scientific assessment reports are published every 5 to 7 years. The IPCC is currently in its seventh assessment cycle, which formally began in July 2023 with the elections of the new IPCC and Task Force Bureaus at the IPCC's Plenary Session in Nairobi. At its first Plenary Session in the seventh assessment cycle – the 60th Plenary Session in Istanbul, Türkiye, in January 2024 – the Panel agreed to produce in this cycle the three Working Group contributions to the Seventh Assessment Report (AR7), namely the Working Group I report on the Physical Science Basis, the Working Group II report on Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability and the Working Group III report on Mitigation of Climate Change. The Synthesis Report of the Seventh Assessment Report will be produced after the completion of the Working Group reports and released by late 2029. During its 62nd Plenary Session held in Hangzhou, China, in February 2025, the Panel has agreed on the outlines of the three Working Group contributions to the Seventh Assessment Report (AR7). At the Panel's most recent Plenary Session in Lima, Peru, in October 2025, member governments agreed on the scientific content of the 2027 Methodology Report on Carbon Dioxide Removal Technologies, Carbon Capture, Utilization and Storage. There, the Panel also agreed on the 2026 workplan for the three Working Group contributions to the Seventh Assessment Report. The Panel decided already during the previous cycle to produce a Special Report on Climate Change and Cities and a Methodology Report on Short-lived Climate Forcers during AR7. At the IPCC's 61st Plenary Session held in Sofia, Bulgaria, from 27 July to 2 August 2024, the Panel agreed upon the outlines for the Special Report on Climate Change and Cities scheduled for approval and publication in March 2027 and for the 2027 IPCC Methodology Report on Inventories for Short-lived Climate Forcers scheduled for publication in the second half 2027. In addition, a revision of the 1994 IPCC Technical Guidelines on impacts and adaptation as well as adaptation indicators, metrics and guidelines, will be developed in conjunction with the Working Group II report and published as a separate product. IPCC's latest report, the Sixth Assessment Report, was completed in March 2023 with the release of its Synthesis Report, which provided direct scientific input to the First Global Stocktake process under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change at COP28 in Dubai. For more information visit www.ipcc.ch.

[Read original article](https://www.ipcc.ch/2026/06/05/ipcc-at-sb64-unfccc/)
