---
layout: feed_item
title: "Islamic Republic of Iran: Humanitarian Update No. 05 | As of 31 May 2026"
date: 2026-06-07 07:30:51 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['year-2026', 'urgent', 'climate-health', 'economic-impacts', 'climate-costs', 'public-health']
keywords: ['republic', 'year-2026', 'islamic', 'iran', 'urgent', 'climate-health', 'economic-impacts', 'climate-costs']
description: "Country: Iran (Islamic Republic of) Source: UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Please refer to the attached file"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/iran-islamic-republic/islamic-republic-iran-humanitarian-update-no-05-31-may-2026
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: Iran (Islamic Republic of) Source: UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Please refer to the attached file. This Humanitarian Update is produced by OCHA Regional Office for the Middle East and North Africa (ROMENA) on behalf of and in collaboration with UN agencies and humanitarian organisations. It covers the period from 1 to 31 May 2026. Highlights A temporary ceasefire announced on 7 April for an initial two-week period has subsequently been extended, although conditions remain fragile and subject to change with attacks having been reported in the area in southern Iran around the Strait of Hormuz in late May. Cumulative figures have been reported for the earlier period of hostilities. A total of 3,375 civilian deaths, including 383 children, 496 women, 67 teachers and 296 students, 27 health workers, 5 nurses, and more than 33,000 injuries have been reported. Four rescue workers of the Iranian Red Crescent Society have been reported killed and more than 60 injured. Educational facilities sustained severe damages with 1,726 educational and affiliated facilities affected including 1,507 schools. As for cultural sites, damage has been reported in 149 historical sites across 18 provinces, including 54 museums, 7 historic areas, and 5 World Heritage sites. Tehran sustained the highest number of damages with 70 sites impacted. Over 149,000 civilian infrastructures were hit by 2,138 airstrikes across most provinces, including 51,000 homes damaged only in Tehran. More than 50 points of road and rail routes -including highways, tunnels, and bridges—were targeted. Out of 2,138 attacks between 28 February and 10 April, Tehran sustained the majority of attacks (522) followed by Hormozgan (177), Khuzestan (151), Isfahan (148), Bushehr (111), East Azerbaijan (109), and Fars (107). The remaining provinces experienced fewer than 100 incidents of attacks, while North Khorasan was the only province reportedly not attacked. Key Figures 3.3K+ Civilians killed (figure is for the period 28 February, as reported by WHO Middle East Conflict Situation Report #8, 28 May 2026) 33K+ Civilians injured (figure is for the period since 28 February, as reported by WHO Middle East Conflict Situation Report #8, 28 May 2026) 149K+ Civilian units damaged (figure is for the period since 28 February as reported by the Iranian Red Crescent Society on 13 May 2026) Situation Overview Cumulative figures continue to be reported on the earlier period of hostilities (28 February – 10 April). In May, authorities reported at least 383 children and 496 women among those killed (at least 3,375 people), and over 33,000 injuries. Critical infrastructure has been heavily impacted, including 245 health facilities, more than 1,500 schools, about 400 water-related sites.The Iranian Red Crescent Society (IRCS) reported damage to 149,528 civilian infrastructures including 123,647 residential and 24,450 commercial units, 32 universities, 56 Red Crescent centres, 43 ambulances, 49 rescue vehicles, three operational vehicles, and three Red Crescent and emergency helicopters. The number of 15 critical infrastructures, five fuel depots, 15 airports, and 211 stadiums and sports facilities were targeted. Several power plants serving industrial units were damaged, requiring the compensation of the shortfall using other available capacities. Reports indicate that over 500 communication sites were targeted causing damage estimated at nearly US $335 million in the Information Technology (IT) sector. Further, Iran's scientific and research infrastructure including knowledge-based companies sustained an estimated $330 millions in damage. A recent study found that airstrikes on 7 March released 29,800 tons of toxic sulfur dioxide over Tehran, comparable to several days of emissions from Hawaii's volcano. Although a ceasefire is in place, humanitarian conditions continue to deteriorate due to inflation and economic disruption, with food inflation reaching up to 115 per cent, severely limiting household purchasing power and increasing vulnerability. With public order remaining largely stable since ceasefire, increasing numbers of people are likely returning to their places of habitual residence following the large movement in March. However, the humanitarian situation is driven by a combination of repercussions of temporary relocation, infrastructure damage, economic decline, high inflation and reduced household purchasing power across affected and vulnerable groups including refugees, women, children, and persons with disabilities. The most critical needs relate to access to health services, mental support, safe water, food, protection, shelter, cash assistance, and education.

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/iran-islamic-republic/islamic-republic-iran-humanitarian-update-no-05-31-may-2026)
