---
layout: feed_item
title: "South Sudan Humanitarian Update 18 - 30 April 2026"
date: 2026-04-30 17:39:57 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['climate-costs', 'urgent', 'solar-power', 'year-2026', 'displacement', 'renewable-energy', 'climate-migration', 'flooding', 'economic-impacts', 'climate-health']
keywords: ['climate-costs', 'urgent', 'solar-power', 'displacement', 'humanitarian', 'sudan', 'south', 'year-2026']
description: "Country: South Sudan Source: UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Please refer to the attached file"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/south-sudan/south-sudan-humanitarian-update-18-30-april-2026
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: South Sudan Source: UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Please refer to the attached file. HIGHLIGHTS More than 7.8 million people in South Sudan are projected to face crisis level hunger or worse between April and July 2026, with 2.2 million children under 5 at risk of acute malnutrition, according to the latest Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) analysis. Up to 73,300 people are facing Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5), the most severe level of acute food insecurity. Over 304,000 people, have been displaced by violence in Jonglei State since December 2025 according to International Organisation for Migration/ Displacement Tracking Matrix (IOM/DTM), as of 25 April. 33 health facilities have been damaged or looted due to ongoing fighting in Jonglei and other areas, leaving an estimated 1.4 million people without access to health care. In a briefing to the Security Council, the UN Emergency Relief Coordinator, Tom Fletcher called for unhindered humanitarian access, flexible funding, full respect of international law, protection of civilians and infrastructure from all responsible parties, and renewed commitment to the Revitalised Peace Agreement. SITUATION OVERVIEW The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the World Food Programme (WFP) and UNICEF, in a press release, warned that a deepening hunger crisis in South Sudan is pushing 7.8 million people into high levels of acute food insecurity (IPC Phase 3 or above) between April and July 2026, according to the latest Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) analysis. This represents 56 percent of the population—one of the highest levels of acute food insecurity in the world today. Among those projected to be acutely food insecure, 73,300 people are facing Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5)—the most severe level of acute food insecurity. This represents a dramatic increase of 160 per cent from the last estimate. Meanwhile, 2.5 million people are in Emergency (IPC Phase 4) and 5.3 million in Crisis (IPC Phase 3). The agencies warn of a credible risk of famine in four counties across Upper Nile and Jonglei States under a worst-case scenario of escalating conflict, further displacement and constrained humanitarian access, according to the latest IPC analysis. These factors have increased over the reporting period and are compounded by climate shocks, economic pressures and declining funding, constraining humanitarian partners' ability to respond at scale. A surge in fighting since late 2025 has displaced large numbers of people and deepened the humanitarian crisis. On 26 April, clashes between the South Sudan People's Defence Forces (SSPDF) and Sudan People's Liberation Army in Opposition (SPLA-IO) displaced civilians in Udier payam, Longochuk County, Upper Nile State. While no casualties were reported, partners report that significant displacement was observed. As of 25 April, violence in Jonglei State has displaced more than 304,770 people, according to the IOM/DTM, including 242,850 within Jonglei State, nearly 29,000 in Mingkaman (Awerial County, Lakes State), approximately 27,000 in Nasir, Panyikang, and Ulang counties of Upper Nile State and over 6,000 in Juba County, Central Equatoria State. In addition,100,000 people displaced in Tiergol, Ethiopia. This displacement has increased vulnerability and exacerbated humanitarian needs, while access to critical humanitarian assistance remains severely constrained. Many families are sheltering in bush areas, wetlands and informal sites with limited access to food, health care, water, sanitation and protection services. Most of the displaced people are women and children, who face heightened risks of gender-based violence, family separation, forced recruitment, and exclusion from education. All schools in Akobo and Ayod counties remain closed, leaving thousands of children unable to learn. Several families are sheltering in bush areas, wetlands and informal sites with limited access to food, health care, water, sanitation and protection services. In Upper Nile State, sporadic violence, airstrikes, revenge killings, and cross-border movements continued across Nasir, Longochuk, Ulang, Baliet, and Kurwai areas. Civilians face grave risks, including killings, restrictions on movement, forced displacement, sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV), and psychosocial distress. On 30 April, Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) announced the permanent closure of Lankien Hospital in Nyirol County following a bombing, looting and vandalism incident on 3 February 2026. The closure ends more than 30 years of MSF medical operations in the area, which had been providing health services to an estimated 250,000 people. The humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate amid escalating conflict, widespread displacement and severe funding constraints. The onset of the rainy season is expected to further restrict access and increase transmission of malaria, acute watery diarrhoea, cholera and other diseases. In Jonglei State, intensified fighting has led to the destruction, looting or damage of at least 33 health facilities in Fangak, Nyirol, Akobo, Ayod and Pigi counties, including repeated attacks on Akobo Hospital, leaving an estimated 1.4 million people without access to health care. Planned service withdrawals by partners may affect additional 240,000 people, significantly increasing public health risks. The urgent restoration and scale‑up of health services remains critical across Jonglei, Upper Nile, Unity, Western Bahr el Ghazal and Western Equatoria states. Nationwide, 31.7 per cent of assessed health facilities by WHO and Health Cluster are non‑functional, affecting an estimated 9.8 million people. The situation is most severe in Jonglei State, where 71.6 per cent of facilities are closed, leaving approximately 1.9 million people without access to essential health services; in Upper Nile State, 25.8 per cent of facilities are not operating, affecting around 840,000 people. Flooding in Leer County, Unity State has damaged several health facilities, leading to a disruption in health services. Affected facilities include Thonyor Primary Health Care Centre (PHCC), Lual Primary Health Care Unit (PHCU), Guat PHCU and Rubchai PHCU. As a result, an estimated 60,000 people have lost, or are at risk of losing, access to health care. In Malakal, Upper Nile State, an estimated 12,000 people lost access to health services after heavy rains destroyed Assossa PHCU recently. In Renk, Malakal and surrounding areas in Upper Nile State, refugee and returnee arrivals continue to strain the overstretched health facilities. The Health Cluster reported a surge in war‑wounded arrivals from Sudan in Renk County, including 187 cases recorded as of 20 April. 37 patients remain hospitalised as of 24 April. Cholera transmission remains active, with a geographic shift toward Jonglei and Lakes States, as well as new cases reported in Renk County, Upper Nile State. As of 30 April, over 103,195 cases and 1,669 deaths have been reported, with a case fatality rate above the emergency threshold. The escalation of conflict in Jonglei and Upper Nile States has worsened the cholera outbreak, threatening the progress made to contain it. Between 21 and 27 April, six counties reported 189 new cholera cases and one associated death. New cases were recorded in Mayom (139), Panyijiar (32), Awerial (8), Renk (6), Yirol East (2), and Twic East (2). The one death came from Awerial. On 10 April, an outbreak of a new Vaccine-Derived Polio Virus of Type 1 (cVDPV1 polio was reported in Maiwut County, Upper Nile State, with at least nine cases reported as of 23 April. Since April 2023, conflict in Sudan has forced more people into South Sudan. Nearly 1.37 million people (441,700 Sudanese refugees and 923,500 South Sudanese returnees) have crossed into South Sudan from Sudan, placing additional strain on already fragile systems. Humanitarian access in South Sudan remains constrained, particularly in Upper Nile and Jonglei, as well as Western Equatoria and Greater Pibor Administrative Area. Constraints are driven by insecurity, coercion, interference, illegal taxation, bureaucratic impediments, and violence against personnel and assets. In Upper Nile, WFP and the Logistics Cluster suspended Malakal–Longochuk convoys on 26 April after repeated illegal payment demands, returning over 30 trucks carrying nutrition and WASH supplies and delaying critical assistance to food-insecure and conflict-affected communities in Longochuk County. In Nasir and Ulang, authorities continued to pressure partners to relocate and restrict movements. In Jonglei, at least eight incidents along the Bor–Twic East–Duk corridor (18–24 April) involved fuel seizures (500–1,000+ litres), looting and assaults, while a 32-truck convoy was temporarily halted at Mereng checkpoint. Renewed fighting in Walgak, Akobo County, on 29 April also disrupted an ongoing food distribution. In Unity, localised insecurity and interference disrupted health and nutrition services, including the temporary closure of a health facility in Bentiu IDP Camp. Bureaucratic impediments continue to delay critical humanitarian supplies due to new transport permission requirements and fees. On 17 April, Ms. Anita Kiki Gbeho, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the head of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) briefed the Security Council on rising political tensions, increased violence and growing humanitarian needs across the country, warning that reduced resources are limiting the mission's ability to respond effectively. She called for continued support to the political process leading to an immediate ceasefire, inclusive dialogue and the conditions necessary for credible elections. On 17 April, the UN Emergency Relief Coordinator, Tom Fletcher, warned that South Sudan is marked by conflict, displacement, hunger, disease and attacks on humanitarian workers. Briefing the Security Council, Mr. Fletcher called for unhindered humanitarian access, increase in flexible funds and called on the Council to demand full respect of international law, protection of civilians and infrastructure from all responsible parties. He also called on the Council to support renewed political efforts to strengthen adherence to ceasefire agreements and move towards implementation of the Revitalised Peace Agreement. HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE IN PRIORITY LOCATIONS Humanitarian partners have scaled up their response to address the urgent needs of people affected by escalating conflict and other crises across the country, despite severe resource and access constraints. Partners are developing an Akobo response strategy to address emerging needs following recent insecurity and displacement. However, the scale of needs remains vast and continues to grow amid ongoing hostilities and a worsening food security situation. HEALTH Response In Jonglei State, IMA World Health provided mobile clinic services in Paguir and Nyambor payams in Fangak County and delivered outreach across multiple locations, conducted more than 114,700 outpatient consultations and supported maternal and trauma care. The Healthcare Foundation Organization (HFO) is sustaining integrated health services across Jonglei and Upper Nile States, delivering over 23,000 consultations between March and April 2026, reaching more than 120,000 people through community engagement and health promotion. In Upper Nile and Unity states, IOM is providing primary health care to more than 80,000 people in Bentiu IDP camp and the former Malakal Protection of Civilians site. International Medical Corps (IMC) supported eight health facilities and multiple mobile teams across Malakal, Fashoda and Canal/Pigi, including in hard‑to‑reach areas. World Vision International continues to deliver integrated health services in Renk, reaching more than 77,000 people through outpatient and maternal health care services. Over 27,000 children under five years of age were reached during a polio vaccination campaign conducted in Maiwut County, Upper Nile State, as of 23 April 2026. The World Health Organization (WHO), in coordination with partners, is planning two additional rounds of synchronised vaccination campaigns with health authorities along the border in Ethiopia. On 22 April, WHO formally requested the Humanitarian Coordinator's support to facilitate humanitarian access and safe passage for the polio outbreak response across all counties in Upper Nile and Jonglei states. On the same day, the OCHA Head of Office raised the issue with the Minister of Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster Management, Hon. Albino Akol Atak, seeking his engagement with relevant line ministries to support the response. Since the start of 2026, WHO has delivered 35.4 metric tonnes of emergency medical supplies valued at US$1.32 million to 20 partners. In March, an additional US$448,000 worth of medical supplies, including the Interagency Emergency Health Kit (IEHK), malaria, cholera and pneumonia kits, the Paediatric Severe Acute Malnutrition (PED‑SAM) modules and essential consumables, have been provided to 18 partners. In response to the escalating crisis in Jonglei, WHO and the Health partners have prepositioned emergency medical supplies in Bor Town for rapid deployment, including IEHK, trauma, pneumonia and cholera kits, sufficient to support thousands of beneficiaries and treat up to 50,000 malaria cases. WHO is also supporting service restoration in conflict‑affected areas, including preparations to assist MSF's planned re‑establishment of selected health services in Akobo. In addition, WHO and partners continue to lead disease surveillance and outbreak investigations through the Early Warning, Alert and Response System (EWARS), deployment of rapid response teams and coordination of responses to suspected outbreaks, including viral haemorrhagic fever in Kapoeta East County in Eastern Equatoria State and Mpox in Western Equatoria and Central Equatoria States. UNICEF continued to support disease outbreak response and emergency health needs in the high‑risk counties of Akobo, Duk, Ayod, and Bor South through the provision of targeted supplies, coordination with the Ministry of Health, and engagement with partners amid ongoing insecurity and displacement. Eight high‑performance tents were deployed to sustain the cholera response, including six to Duk County and two to Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) in Chuil, Fangak County. A combined Health, WASH, and Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE) response was initiated, including the establishment of oral rehydration points, to address a high‑severity situation characterised by the cholera case fatality rate (CFR) of 6.6 per cent and multiple reported community deaths. In Abyei Administrative Area, more than 18,000 children were vaccinated against measles during a campaign led by the State Ministry of Health, community leaders and frontline health workers, with support from MSF and other partners from 27 March to 9 April. The campaign achieved 95 per cent coverage, helping to strengthen immunity across vulnerable communities. On 25 April, the Ministry of Health, together with UN agencies and partners, launched a nationwide campaign to distribute 9.5 million insecticide-treated mosquito nets to prevent malaria. UNICEF reports that nearly 7 million mosquito nets are already in the country, with distributions ongoing to states, counties and hard-to-reach communities. According to WHO, malaria continued to be the leading cause of illness during the 23–29 March epidemiological week, with 48,757 reported cases and nine associated deaths. Gaps and challenges Severe funding shortfalls remain the primary challenge affecting the continuity of health services. Planned service closures by partners are expected to leave more than 240,000 people without access to essential health care, significantly increasing risks of morbidity and mortality. Insecurity and access constraints continue to impede humanitarian operations, particularly in Jonglei and Upper Nile states. Recurrent attacks on health infrastructure continue to undermine service delivery and recovery efforts. Supply chain disruptions, high logistics costs, and shortages of trained health workers and surveillance staff continue to constrain response capacity. Recent proposals to introduce additional fees for transporting medical supplies are expected to exacerbate these challenges, potentially delaying deliveries, reducing coverage and undermining operations in hard‑to‑reach, high‑need areas. FOOD SECURITY AND LIVELIHOODS Delivery of emergency food continues with humanitarian partners carrying out verifications and deliveries to conflict-affected communities. Response In Jonglei State, as of 27 April, WFP and partners continue verification and food distributions for people affected by conflict in Akobo, Ayod, Duk, Nyirol and Uror counties. By 25 April, 478,812 internally displaced people and host community members had been verified as requiring food and livelihoods assistance across the counties. Food distributions are ongoing in all verified counties except Akobo East payam, where operations have been suspended due to insecurity, and Akobo West, where verification is still underway. As of 25 April, some 4,319 metric tonnes of food had been distributed to an estimated 308,000 people, including 82,150 people in Ayod County, 61,200 in Duk County, 35,700 in Nyirol County and 128,800 in Uror County. In Akobo West, verification is ongoing at two food distribution points in Walgak and Wechjal payams, with 11,963 people verified to date. Food deliveries will commence once verification is completed. In Twic East County, a market assessment confirmed the feasibility of cash-based transfers. WFP Bor will deploy a verification team from 26 April to 2 May, followed by cash distributions. Despite ongoing assistance, humanitarian access to around 36,000 people in Nyatim payam, Nyirol County, remains restricted by authorities, exacerbating food insecurity. In Upper Nile State, WFP completed food response in Eastern Corridor in Renk County, reaching more than 19,300 people (males 7,700 males and 11,600 females) with 17.4 metric tonnes of fortified biscuits. The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) trained 14 management committee members for multipurpose community centres and seed stores in Renk and Melut Counties. FAO prepositioned livelihood inputs targeting 1,000 households in Renk County during the rainy season. GOAL, an international NGO, supported the marketing of 29,727 kilogrammes of fresh fish in Renk County and the exportation of 2,304 kilogrammes to Sudan. At least 40 people (20 males, 20 females), including fisherfolk, gum arabic producers and butchers) were trained on village savings and loan associations (VSLA). Lutheran World Federation (LWF) trained 50 female heads of households on business skills. In Abyei Administrative Area, Save the Children International distributed 0.62 metric tonnes of high-energy biscuits to 500 newly displaced IDPs, primarily children under five and pregnant and lactating women at the Abyei Youth Centre and Agok/Juol-jok IDP sites. Samaritan's Purse distributed 430 (50‑kg) bags of food commodities, including maize flour, rice, beans, vegetable oil, and salt. In addition, a civil society organization distributed maize flour, rice, oil, and salt to displaced populations in Abyei Town. Save the Children International also provided multipurpose cash assistance to 1,331 IDP households, mostly women displaced from Abiemnhom County to Abyei Town, with each household receiving US$168. Similarly, the Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC) provided multipurpose cash assistance to 10,742 IDPs (1,600 households) in the Juol‑jok IDP settlement in Abyei Town, with each household receiving SSP 646,000 (US$141). Trust Guarantee Community Development Aid (TGCDA) registered 6,545 households (4,241 female‑ and 2,304 male‑headed) to receive in‑kind emergency agricultural inputs. TGCDA also trained 173 community‑based agricultural extension workers (112 women and 61 men) to support the dissemination of climate‑smart agricultural practices and information. Bishop Gassis Relief and Rescue Foundation (BGRRF) distributed food assistance to 200 IDP households in Abyei Town, all of whom fled conflict in Abiemnhom County. BGRRF further identified and registered 150 households for food assistance and 125 households for seed and tools support. In addition, WFP and partners biometrically registered 43,100 vulnerable individuals from host communities for targeting under the lean‑season response beginning in May 2026. Gaps and challenges Six incidents of fuel looting from trucks contracted by WFP were recorded in Bor, with some food assistance reportedly forcibly taken by armed forces along the northern and central Jonglei State route. The incidents were reported to state authorities for investigation, and WFP is engaging national authorities in Juba. NUTRITION Response Health facilities in Warrap and Jonglei States have resumed admissions following the delivery of supplies, particularly for the Targeted Supplementary Feeding Programme (TSFP), restoring services disrupted by previous service breaks, according to the Nutrition cluster. Efforts to deliver and pre‑position nutrition commodities ahead of the rainy season are ongoing. Mobile and outreach teams have been deployed to reach remote and hard‑to‑access IDP locations. Increased resource allocations from UN agencies have supported the expansion of Community Nutrition Volunteers (CNVs) and outreach activities, resulting in improved active case‑finding. UNICEF and partners reported that integrated, life‑saving nutrition services continue across Jonglei State, apart from Akobo County. In Nyirol County, 1,000 cartons of high-energy biscuits (BP5) and 1,000 cartons of Ready‑to‑Use Therapeutic Food (RUTF) were delivered to Chuil Payam via Logistics Cluster air support from Malakal. In Akobo County, the international NGO GOAL is providing nutrition services to displaced populations in Barmach, supported by UNICEF deliveries of 17 cartons of BP5 and 4,900 cartons of Ready-to-Use Therapeutic Food (RUTF). Following the destruction of nutrition sites in Duk County, UNICEF deployed six high‑performance tents to establish temporary service delivery points. Due to access constraints, approximately 3,000 cartons of RUTF were airlifted to Pochalla County in the Greater Pibor Administrative Area. However, access challenges persist across many affected locations. An estimated 300 cartons of RUTF intended for conflict‑affected populations in Pading, Nyirol County, and 700 cartons for Boma remain stranded in Bor Town, with no confirmed delivery timeline. In response to ongoing insecurity and displacement, nutrition partners have adapted service delivery modalities, shifting from fixed‑site service provision to mobile and outreach approaches to sustain access to life‑saving nutrition services. Gaps and challenges Significant loss of nutrition supplies and damage to infrastructure due to conflict, notably in Akobo and Uror counties. Other challenges include widespread stock-outs of essential supplies like RUSF, SAM kits, and amoxicillin, high transport costs and limited access due to poor road infrastructure and the impending rainy season, ongoing road insecurity, which restricts humanitarian movement and outreach activities and high demand for services exceeding planned supply capacities in transit centres and host communities in Renk. WATER, SANITATION, AND HYGIENE (WASH) Response In Unity State: WASH partners distributed WASH kits to 1,800 households in Panyijiar County, providing essential supplies to help mitigate public health risks associated with overcrowding, limited water access and poor hygiene conditions. To strengthen access to safe water in outbreak‑prone areas, two emergency solar water treatment (SWAT) systems were installed in Thoanhom and Nyal payams. In addition, 500 severe acute malnutrition and moderate acute malnutrition (SAM/MAM) kits were distributed to health and nutrition facilities to support malnourished children and patients. Rehabilitation of nine hand pumps is ongoing, restoring access to reliable water sources for affected communities. Construction of three block latrines, each with four stances, is underway at health and nutrition facilities in Thoanhom and Nyal payams to improve sanitation conditions and reduce contamination risks. In Abiemnhom County, Ruweng Administrative Area, the international NGO Samaritan's Purse reported the completion of WASH non‑food item distributions to 1,500 households. Distributed items included filter cloths, PUR sachets, buckets with and without tops, and soap. The organization also rehabilitated two boreholes, improving access to safe water for approximately 1,000 people, and delivered health and hygiene messaging to internally displaced people to promote improved hygiene practices and community awareness. In Upper Nile State: A national NGO, HFO, trained 25 community health and hygiene promoters and has ongoing hygiene promotion activities at health and nutrition facilities and in surrounding communities. In Nasir County, WASH partners reported the rehabilitation of eight boreholes, providing safe water access to approximately 4,000 people. In addition, 14 handpump mechanics were trained to strengthen local capacity for operation and maintenance. Ten semi‑permanent latrines (each with two stances) were constructed in health and nutrition facilities and communities, improving sanitation services for around 1,000 people. Ongoing water, sanitation and hygiene services at Renk transit centre in Renk County and Malakal transit centre in Malakal County are supporting more than 10,000 people through desludging, latrine cleaning, solid waste management and hygiene promotion activities. In Renk, local partner CATI is responding to suspected cholera cases, including a newly reported outbreak in Geger payam. Safe water production continues through solar water treatment (SWAT) systems in Renk, Ulang, Malakal and Fashoda counties. Water trucking in Renk payam is reaching approximately 24,000 people without access to reliable water sources. In Malakal town, WASH non-food items are being distributed to families with malnourished children in coordination with nutrition partners. In Jonglei State: In the Greater Pibor Administrative Area, the international NGO ForAfrika completed rehabilitation works on 10 boreholes in Pibor County, providing safe water access to approximately 5,000 people. In addition, four water user management committees were trained in Pibor and Jebel Boma to strengthen community capacity for the sustainable management of water services. In Verthet, UNICEF supported the rehabilitation of solar water treatment (SWAT) systems, while WASH non-food items from the core pipeline were distributed to 300 households, improving hygiene conditions and resilience among vulnerable families. In Western Equatoria State: A national NGO, Community Aid for Relief and Development (CARD), secured funding to implement life‑saving WASH activities across four high‑density camps in Tambura County, including the UNMISS Temporary Operating Base, St. Mary, Barracks and Complex camps. CARD trained a mobile sanitation team that is actively managing solid waste disposal and conducting general clean‑up activities across the camps. In addition, CARD rehabilitated 10 boreholes and trained 21 community hygiene promoters, who are conducting hygiene promotion, sanitation awareness and water treatment campaigns. Local partner, Network for Social Development Organization (NSDO), is strengthening water and sanitation services in Ibba, Mundri West and Mundri East counties. NSDO has trained 14 handpump mechanics (10 men and four women) and is providing refresher training to water management committees (12 women and six men). NSDO has started the excavation of emergency latrine pits, constructed two emergency bathing shelters, and is currently distributing WASH non‑food items across the three counties to improve hygiene conditions and dignity. Gaps and challenges Access constraints continue to hamper humanitarian operations in Akobo, limiting the timely delivery of WASH services. Coverage remains inadequate as conflict‑induced displacement increases the number of households in need of WASH non‑food items. Damage to infrastructure has resulted in repeated borehole breakdowns, with the sustainability of services dependent on strengthened community ownership and maintenance capacity. Ongoing resource constraints, including limited funding and supplies, further restrict the scale of interventions and the ability to meet growing needs. SHELTER AND NON-FOOD ITEMS Response Through the Emergency Rapid Response Mechanism (ERRM), the Coalition for Humanity (CH) and the Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC) completed the distribution of shelter and non‑food items (NFIs) to nearly 30,000 people (approximately 5,000 households) in Paguir, Toch and Kuernyang payams of Fangak County. UNHCR plans to support the most vulnerable displaced households through targeted distributions of Core Relief Items (CRIs), including plastic sheets in Bor South County. In addition, UNHCR conducted a small‑scale distribution of blankets and mosquito nets to an unverified number of highly vulnerable households in Bor Town. NRC also reported the completion of NFI distributions targeting 13,800 people (2,300 households) affected by conflict and flooding in Ayod County. NRC has also deployed a response team to Mayendit County in Unity State to assist 12,000 people (2,000 households) impacted by floods in the previous year. Meanwhile, IOM provided shelter and NFIs, including plastic sheets and rubber ropes, to approximately 2,000 displaced people in Bentiu IDP camp in Unity State as part of preparedness efforts for the upcoming rainy season. In Abyei Administrative Area, local partner Traditional Governance and Cultural Association (TGCA) reported the commencement of shelter and NFI assessments, with plans to assist 4,720 people (787 households) identified as being in urgent need of emergency shelter and NFIs. PROTECTION Response In Jonglei State, UNICEF gender-based violence (GBV), and Child Protection partners conducted rapid assessments in Fangak County and are providing services to affected women and children. Approximately 1,500 dignity kits were distributed to conflict‑affected populations in Bor South and Duk Counties, while 15 safe‑space kits were delivered to the mobile humanitarian agency (MHA) in Uror to support mobile psychosocial support (PSS) services. At least 380 women and girls accessed gender‑based violence (GBV) prevention and response services in Bor South and Fangak Counties, with additional service delivery being expanded in identified GBV hotspot areas. Emergency child protection services continue through static and mobile teams, providing case management and PSS in Bor South, Duk, and Twic East Counties. An estimated 1,421 children, adolescents, and caregivers were reached with mental health and psychosocial support (MHPSS) through static and temporary Child‑Friendly Spaces (CFS) in Duk, Bor South, and Uror Counties. UNICEF, in collaboration with partners and the State Ministry of Health, trained eight health workers (2 female, 6 male) on the Clinical Management of Rape (CMR) and Intimate Partner Violence (IPV) from 10 to 12 March. Post‑rape care supplies, including HIV post‑exposure prophylaxis (PEP), were also delivered to Duk County. To respond to insecurity and population displacement, mobile GBV and Child Protection teams are being established to provide flexible, short‑term support in high‑risk areas. In Upper Nile State, coordinated protection, GBV, child protection, mental health and psychosocial support (MHPSS), mine action and reintegration services were delivered in Malakal, Fashoda, Baliet and Bulukat Transit Centre in Malakal, as well as at the Pagak border point in Maiwut County, Upper Nile State, and surrounding areas. Assistance targeted internally displaced people, returnees and persons with special needs, with a focus on women and children affected by displacement, GBV, trauma and food insecurity. Protection monitoring and advocacy activities continued nationwide despite access constraints. On 15 April, IOM and UNHCR organized onward transportation assistance for 600 newly arrived people in Renk County. The new arrivals including 450 returnees and 150 refugees, were transported to Malakal for onward movement to their final destinations. This marked the first joint movement supported by both agencies and is expected to improve resource efficiency. Gaps and challenges Severe access constraints continue to limit the scale‑up of protection activities and the ability to maintain a sustained field presence. Underfunding has led to increased reliance on remote programming. Limited capacity to track displacement at scale, particularly in bush and cross‑border areas. Ongoing insecurity continues to undermine civilian safety, livelihoods and access to essential services. EDUCATION Response UNICEF and partners continue to support education services, provide learning materials and targeted assistance to children affected by conflict and displacement. Partnerships with national organizations are being finalized to deliver context appropriate education services in hard‑to‑reach areas. Education partners have launched a back‑to‑Learning campaign in Uror County. In addition, an intersectoral assessment is underway to assess infrastructure damage, learning disruptions, and priority education needs. LOGISTICS Response The Logistics Cluster reported that no truck movements were requested through the cluster convoy scheduled for 23 April in Jonglei State, as road access was confirmed to all major areas, including Akobo West Payam (Akobo County), and Nyirol, Ayod, Uror, and Duk Counties. Humanitarian partners were notified that the final convoy to Pibor is scheduled for 28 April. The airlift response for Nutrition and WASH supplies to Ulang and Nasir counties has been completed, with a total of 220 metric tonnes delivered. The final cargo delivery to Chuil, Fangak County, for Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) is planned in the coming week, before the end of the current contract for the large helicopter. This will significantly limit air operations. Road closures are anticipated in most locations, including northern Jonglei State, by mid‑May, due to weather conditions. COORDINATION AND FUNDING The acting Humanitarian Coordinator in South Sudan maintained close engagement with national authorities, Humanitarian Country Team members, Heads of Missions and key partners through bilateral exchanges and coordination for, highlighting protection concerns and access constraints issues. At the state level, the Inter-Cluster Coordination Groups continued to support coordination of needs assessment and response activities and contributed to the identification of gaps in service coverage and access. Efforts to strengthen linkages between national and sub- national coordination structures continued to support responsive efforts. Humanitarian stocks are being rapidly depleted, with limited prospects for replenishment due to insufficient funding, rising demand, and persistent supply‑chain disruptions, particularly in hard‑to‑reach areas where access remains restricted. Without additional funding, partners face increasing challenges in expanding and sustaining a multi‑sectoral humanitarian response. The 2026 Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan (HNRP) is currently 24.2 per cent funded as of 30 April.

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/south-sudan/south-sudan-humanitarian-update-18-30-april-2026)
