---
layout: feed_item
title: "Warning against 'consumer club' as G7 forms critical minerals alliance"
date: 2026-06-18 14:22:28 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['economic-impacts', 'oceania', 'year-2026', 'urgent', 'wind-power', 'renewable-energy', 'climate-costs', 'australia']
keywords: ['economic-impacts', 'oceania', 'year-2026', 'urgent', 'warning', 'wind-power', 'against', 'consumer']
description: "Wealthy nations in the G7 have agreed to work more closely together to secure the minerals they need for the energy transition, AI and defence, and to divers..."
external_url: https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/06/18/warning-against-consumer-club-as-g7-forms-critical-minerals-alliance/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Climate Home News"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Wealthy nations in the G7 have agreed to work more closely together to secure the minerals they need for the energy transition, AI and defence, and to diversify supply chains away from China, calling for more cooperation with 'like-minded partners'. But the agreement adopted at this week's G7 leaders' summit in France is vague on what co-operation with resource-rich developing countries could look like, with critics warning against creating a consumer club of powerful nations that excludes others from shaping standards and building green supply chains. 'The G7 communiqué reaffirms our suspicion that, for the G7, it is all about resource security, not just energy transition,' Claude Kabemba, executive director of Southern Africa Resource Watch, told Climate Home News. May 26, 2026 Clean Energy Frontier After another battery startup bankruptcy, can Europe ever cut reliance on China? Norway's Morrow Batteries set out to challenge Chinese producers, but a cash crunch forced it to file for bankruptcy in a setback for European ambitions for clean energy sovereignty Read more Jun 5, 2026 Clean Energy Frontier The scramble to stockpile critical minerals could drive up energy transition costs Researchers warn that uncoordinated stockpiling could push up prices of minerals needed for clean energy technologies and delay their roll out Read more Jun 10, 2026 Clean Energy Frontier Brazil jostles for rare earths share as US-China rivalry heats up With the world's second-largest reserves of rare earths after China, Brazil is catching the eye of US and Chinese companies – spurring the government's critical minerals policy push Read more In a joint communique, the leaders of some of the world's largest economies said they would step up coordination within the group and with partner countries to establish mineral processing and industrial capacity, support local value addition, promote innovation, develop standards, improve mineral traceability and share information on stockpiling systems. They agreed to create a joint crisis-prevention mechanism with the support of the International Energy Agency to monitor mineral supply and demand disruptions, as well as establish harmonised platforms to provide information about the origin of minerals, starting with lithium and nickel. The statement was endorsed by France, the UK, Canada, Germany, Italy, Japan, the US and the European Union at the end of the three-day summit in Evian, on the French shores of Lake Geneva. Australia, which isn't a G7 member, also supported the declaration. Breaking dependency on China Western governments have been scrambling to secure the minerals they need to produce clean energy technologies such as batteries, electric vehicles and wind turbines, as well as hardware for artificial intelligence and military equipment while breaking their dependence on China. China controls most supply chains for the strategic minerals they need, dominating the processing of 19 out of 20 critical minerals. The only exception is nickel, where Indonesia leads on supply and processing. Last year, Beijing spooked governments in Europe and the US when it imposed restrictions on rare earths exports, signalling its willingness to use its industrial clout to achieve its geopolitical objectives. 'We are all faced with risks of over-dependence and therefore vulnerability in our value chains,' French President Emmanuel Macron told a press conference, citing the 'risks of divisions' among the group on how to respond to China's control over strategic resources. 'We have decided to move forward together,' he said. Leaders agreed to aggregate demand to support the development of minerals projects and set targets for reducing dependencies on any single country outside the G7 by the end of the year. A US proposal to regulate mineral prices and a French push to establish a permanent secretariat to track G7 initiatives on minerals failed to reach consensus among the group, according to Reuters. Who has a seat at the table? The declaration recognises the need for 'mutually beneficial partnerships' and 'plurilateral trade agreements' between G7 countries and 'like-minded' and 'trusted' partners to build diversified supply chains. Other parts of the text refer to 'developing countries' and 'emerging economies'. A separate G7 statement on 'mutually beneficial international partnerships' mentions the need for international cooperation along the whole of mineral supply chains. 'Who is going to be part of this conversation is unclear,' said Sébastien Treyer, executive director of France think-tank IDDRI, citing the ambiguity of the language and calling for developing countries to be part of the conversation. Trade agreements that support green industrialisation can be 'an entry point' for investment into value-addition projects in developing countries, said Treyer, but 'how this is going to be operationalised is the key question'. Moving beyond a 'consumer club' Resource-rich developing countries, particularly in Africa, have called for investment to build their industrial capacity to turn raw materials into high-value components for clean energy technologies such as batteries, capturing more domestic value and creating jobs. But Kabemba, whose organisation is based in South Africa, said the declaration says 'nothing about transferring industrial capacity to previously exploited regions such Africa'. 'Africa needs to react with its own coalition of the willing to put Africa's interests first, otherwise, Africa risks being locked into a role as a raw material supplier in a new economic order it is not helping to build,' he said. Apr 30, 2026 Clean Energy Frontier Kenya seeks regional coordination to build African mineral value chains Kenyan President William Ruto is the latest African leader to announce an end to raw mineral exports as governments want to add more value to their resources Read more May 27, 2026 Clean Energy Frontier Recycling could meet half of Europe's critical mineral needs by 2050 A new report by an EU-funded research project says the bloc could harness its 'urban mines' to reduce its dependence on China for energy transition minerals Read more May 15, 2026 Clean Energy Frontier Ukraine can help Europe meet its battery material needs, experts say The country could contribute to the European Union's efforts to reduce its dependence on China for graphite but the war poses major challenges Read more Patrick Schröder, a resource governance expert at Chatham House, agreed that the G7 remains overwhelmingly focused on securing minerals supplies and reducing its dependence on China. 'The benefits for developing country producers are only marginal in the G7 discussions,' he said. Brazil, which is rich in rare earths, graphite and copper, was invited to attend the G7 meeting but did not endorse the minerals declaration – highlighting the need for future minerals framework to be more inclusive and responsive to producer-country concerns, said Schröder. For Luc Tezenas, head of policy and advocacy at the Resource Justice Network, 'the answer to rising geopolitical fragmentation cannot be to shrink multilateralism into a smaller club of 'like-minded' consumer economies'. Instead, a non-binding minerals framework put forward by South Africa during its presidency of the G20 last year 'shows more promise as a pathway forward because it attempts to link supply resilience with regional value chains and economic justice,' he said. The UK, which is presiding over the G20 next year, has the opportunity to build a more inclusive way forward, he added. Circularity: another way to capture value G7 nations also described the circular economy and the substitution of minerals in designing technologies as 'key' to meet growing demand and secure sufficient supplies. This, they said, includes increasing recycling capacity by setting targets, combatting the illegal transfer of used products and components, and promoting the recovery of minerals from secondary sources such as mining waste. 'We also recognise the opportunity for emerging market and developing economies to benefit from capturing added value through the recycling and secondary processing of their mining waste, as well as from circular economy innovations,' they said. Schröder, of Chatham House, said the challenge now lies in demonstrating that intentions can be turned into creating a circular economy for minerals through investments, business support and a favourable policy environment. The post Warning against 'consumer club' as G7 forms critical minerals alliance appeared first on Climate Home News.

[Read original article](https://www.climatechangenews.com/2026/06/18/warning-against-consumer-club-as-g7-forms-critical-minerals-alliance/)
