---
layout: feed_item
title: "Introducing Carbon Brief’s 2026 cohort of contributing editors"
date: 2026-04-07 09:00:00 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['antarctica', 'climate-science', 'glaciers', 'urgent', 'polar-regions', 'renewable-energy', 'clean-energy', 'economic-impacts', 'ipcc', 'year-2026']
keywords: ['antarctica', 'introducing', 'carbon', 'glaciers', 'urgent', 'polar-regions', 'brief', 'climate-science']
description: "The contributing editors, who will serve a term of two years in the role, are not paid by Carbon Brief and do not endorse its content"
external_url: https://www.carbonbrief.org/introducing-carbon-briefs-2026-cohort-of-contributing-editors/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Carbon Brief"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Carbon Brief’s editorial team is supported by an international group of academics, each specialising in various areas of climate science, biodiversity, energy and policy. As contributing editors, they help to keep Carbon Brief up-to-date with the latest scientific and policy developments, as well as providing advice, when required, on matters of scientific accuracy. The contributing editors, who will serve a term of two years in the role, are not paid by Carbon Brief and do not endorse its content. Prof Bethan Davies (@iceybethan.bsky.social) Prof Bethan Davies is a professor of glaciology at Newcastle University. She specialises in the response of glaciers and ice sheets to climate change, with recent work focusing on the British-Irish Ice Sheet, Patagonia, Antarctica, the Andes, Alaska, Svalbard and Austria. She is currently editor for the journal Quaternary Science Reviews, chair of the UK Arctic-Antarctic Partnership and co-chair of Diversity in Polar Science Initiative. She is a lead author on the Intergovernmental Panel Climate Change’s (IPCC) upcoming IPCC seventh assessment report (AR7). She also established the website AntarcticGlaciers.org. Dr Joanna Depledge (Joanna Depledge) Dr Joanna Depledge is a fellow at the Cambridge Centre for Environment, Energy and Natural Resource Governance (CEENRG) at the University of Cambridge. She has been following climate change and wider environmental negotiations for more than 25 years, including as a staff member at the secretariat of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and a reporter for the Earth Negotiations Bulletin. Joanna has been on the editorial team of the journal Climate Policy since 2014. She is also a founding member of Cambridge Zero, a member of the research network Climate Strategies, and sat on the steering committee of the production gap report for 2020 and 2021. Dr Gabriela Di Giulio Dr Gabriela Di Giulio is an associate professor at the University of São Paulo. She holds a BA in journalism, an MSc in science and technology policy and a PhD in environment and society from the University of Campinas. Her research explores the interactions between environment, society and science–policy dynamics, with a particular focus on how environmental crises affect socio-cultural contexts. Her current work addresses climate change and adaptation, the governance and communication of risks and uncertainties, and pathways toward sustainability transitions. Prof Erich Fischer (@erichfischer.bsky.social) Prof Erich Fischer is climate scientist at ETH Zurich. His research interests include changes in weather and climate extremes, detection and attribution, climate variability, constraining uncertainties in global-to-regional model projections, and the human impacts of warming. He is a lead author on both the IPCC sixth and seventh assessment report. He is co-chair of the World Climate Research Program (WCRP) Lighthouse Activity on Explaining and Predicting Earth System Change (EPESC). He is an associate editor on the journal Science Advances and a co-editor of Weather and Climate Dynamics. Prof Sabine Fuss Prof Sabine Fuss is a working group leader and head of research department at the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research (PIK). She holds a professorship in sustainable resource management and global change at Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin Her expertise is in sustainable development, tropical rainforest conservation and climate change mitigation, with a particular focus on carbon dioxide removal. She was a lead author on the IPCC’s special report on 1.5C and was appointed to the European Academy of Sciences in 2021. She received her PhD in international economics from Maastricht University in 2008. Dr Kirsten Mayer (@kirstenjmayer.bsky.social) Dr Kirsten Mayer is a scientist at the US National Science Foundation National Center for Atmospheric Research (NSF NCAR). Her research uses machine learning to explore sources of predictability within the Earth System, particularly focused on subseasonal and longer timescales. She is also an active member of the WCRP ESMO Working Group on Subseasonal to Interdecadal Prediction (WGSIP). She has a PhD in atmospheric sciences from Colorado State University. Dr Albert Salamanca Dr Albert M Salamanca heads the secretariat of the Adaptation Research Alliance (ARA) and is a senior research fellow at the Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI) Asia centre. His work focuses on climate change adaptation, disaster risk reduction and sustainable development, with particular attention to strengthening the research–policy interface in south-east Asia. He holds a PhD in geography from Durham University. Dr Christopher Trisos (Christopher Trisos) Dr Christopher Trisos is the director of the Climate Risk Lab and of the African Synthesis Centre for Climate Change, Environment and Development (ASCEND) at University of Cape Town. He holds the AXA research chair in African climate risk at the African Climate and Development Initiative. His work focuses on understanding risks from climate change to enable communities to adapt for a better future, with a particular focus on Africa and the global south. He has served as a coordinating lead author for the IPCC, a negotiator at the UNFCCC, and has advised several international organisations and governments on climate change risks and adaptation. Carbon Brief is grateful for the support of its earlier cohort of contributing editors:&nbsp; Second cohort: Dr Céline Guivarch; Prof Frank Jotzo; Dr Zachary Labe; Dr David Lapola; Dr Friederike Otto; Prof Lisa Schipper; Dr Chandni Singh; and Dr Portia Adade Williams. First cohort: Prof Richard Allan; Prof Mark Brandon; Prof Piers Forster; Prof Gabriele Hegerl; Prof Simon Lewis; Prof Tim Osborn; Prof Camille Parmesan; and Prof Peter Stott. DeBriefed 2 April 2026: Countries ‘revive’ energy-crisis measures | Record UK renewables | Plug-in solar savings DeBriefed | 02.04.26 DeBriefed 27 March 2026: North Sea myths debunked | India’s climate plan | IPCC and Indigenous knowledge DeBriefed | 27.03.26 Guest post: How declining cloudiness is accelerating global warming Global temperature | 26.03.26 Analysis: India’s CO2 emissions in 2025 grew at slowest rate in two decades Emissions | 26.03.26 The post Introducing Carbon Brief&#8217;s 2026 cohort of contributing editors appeared first on Carbon Brief.

[Read original article](https://www.carbonbrief.org/introducing-carbon-briefs-2026-cohort-of-contributing-editors/)
