---
layout: feed_item
title: "Sweden increases humanitarian support to Lebanon"
date: 2026-04-22 11:29:50 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['climate-health', 'year-2026', 'urgent', 'public-health']
keywords: ['climate-health', 'sweden', 'urgent', 'public-health', 'humanitarian', 'year-2026', 'increases']
description: "Countries: Lebanon, Sweden Source: Government of Sweden Sweden is announcing an additional humanitarian support package to Lebanon of SEK 70 million"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/lebanon/sweden-increases-humanitarian-support-lebanon
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Countries: Lebanon, Sweden Source: Government of Sweden Sweden is announcing an additional humanitarian support package to Lebanon of SEK 70 million. The support is being provided in light of the country's worsening humanitarian situation due to the conflict between Israel and Hezbollah. It will contribute to addressing basic needs, protecting the civilian population and creating security for those who have been hardest-hit by the conflict. 'The humanitarian situation in Lebanon is extremely serious. In addition to many dead, wounded and displaced people, we have also seen attacks targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure, and medical staff and humanitarian aid workers. This is unacceptable. The Lebanese people deserve peace and security. We are therefore now increasing humanitarian support to bolster the extremely hard-hit civilian population,' says Minister for International Development Cooperation and Foreign Trade Benjamin Dousa. 'The Government is clear that this support is for Lebanon and its population, who have had to suffer devastating consequences of the conflict between Israel and Hezbollah. The ceasefire that is underway is welcome but fragile, and must also lead to a long-term solution,' says Minister for Foreign Affairs Maria Malmer Stenergard. Since the conflict broke out on 2 March, more than 1.2 million people have been forced to leave their homes. This corresponds to a fifth of Lebanon's population. These people now find themselves in over-crowded collective emergency housing, staying with relatives or in make-shift tents in car parks. Schools have largely been forced to function as reception centres for internally displaced persons, which has once again interrupted schooling for children. 'More than one million Lebanese are fleeing from the war. It's our human obligation to alleviate the suffering of the vulnerable civilian population. Sweden is now sending an additional SEK 70 million to provide shelter, hot food, health and medical care and psychosocial support following traumatic experiences of war,' says Gudrun Brunegård, development assistance policy spokesperson (Christian Democrats). 'Many people are now homeless as the fighting in southern Lebanon has intensified. This is about extremely vulnerable people who need a roof over their head, food and emergency medical care. Sweden has an important role to play in relieving suffering, and it is right that we now increase humanitarian support to Lebanon,' says Fredrik Malm, foreign policy spokesperson (Liberal Party). In addition to Sweden's extensive core support to the International Red Cross Movement and several UN organisations operating in Lebanon, Sweden announced a SEK 65 million humanitarian support package the day after the UN launched its emergency humanitarian appeal for Lebanon on 13 March. In light of the continued deterioration of the situation, an additional SEK 70 million is now being provided, of which SEK 24 million is from the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and SEK 46 million is from Sida. Sweden's targeted humanitarian assistance to Lebanon will thus total SEK 135 million in 2026. The assistance focuses on the most vulnerable, providing displaced persons with access to collective emergency housing and essential necessities such as hot meals, emergency medical care and psychosocial support to cope with the trauma of yet another violent conflict. Distribution of the SEK 70 million humanitarian support package UN Refugee Agency (UNHCR), SEK 10 million: for emergency support and protection efforts for the more than 1.2 million displaced persons. This involves ensuring people's access to shelter, distributing blankets and mattresses, and offering psychosocial support. Since 2 March, the UNHCR has helped more than 151 000 internally displaced persons in collective emergency housing and 31 000 individuals in hard-to-reach areas. World Food Programme (WFP), SEK 10 million: provides hot meals, ready-to-eat food rations, bread and cash assistance to displaced and vulnerable people in the country. In March, the WFP reached more than 440 000 people with 1.6 million hot meals and distributed cash assistance for food to 100 000 refugees. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), SEK 4 million: provides healthcare facilities and emergency medical services with vital medical supplies, while also working to protect civilians and promoting respect for international humanitarian law. Funding from Sida totalling SEK 46 million: consists of the initial country allocation to Lebanon, funding via Sida's fast-track funding mechanism and additional funding. This support is distributed to Action Against Hunger, the Norwegian Refugee Council, the Lebanon NGO Forum and the ICRC. The support contributes to emergency humanitarian help directed at those in the greatest need. Funding for this support is drawn from the 2026 development assistance budget. Press contact Lukas Zeiler Press Secretary to Minister for International Development Cooperation and Foreign Trade Benjamin Dousa Phone (switchboard) +46 8 405 10 00 Mobile +46 76 764 06 21 email to Lukas Zeiler Sara E Persson Press Secretary to Minister for Foreign Affairs Maria Malmer Stenergard Phone (switchboard) +46 8 405 10 00 Mobile +46 76 112 78 19 email to Sara E Persson Nina Tojzner Press contact for the Liberal Party Phone +46 72 217 66 51 Karl Gustel Wärnberg Press secretary, Christian Democrats Parliamentary Secretariat Mobile 076-531 06 68 email to Karl Gustel Wärnberg

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/lebanon/sweden-increases-humanitarian-support-lebanon)
