---
layout: feed_item
title: "DeBriefed 15 April 2026: Trump-Xi talk energy | 'Supercharged' El Niño | India's first 'heat lounges'"
date: 2026-05-15 13:50:06 +0000
categories: [environmental_news]
tags: ['arctic', 'solar-power', 'fossil-fuels', 'el-nino', 'wind-power', 'wildfires', 'economic-impacts', 'flooding', 'water-crisis', 'renewable-energy']
keywords: ['wind-power', 'trump', 'arctic', 'april', 'debriefed', 'solar-power', 'fossil-fuels', 'el-nino']
description: "An essential guide to the week's key developments relating to climate change"
external_url: https://www.carbonbrief.org/debriefed-15-april-2026-trump-xi-talk-energy-supercharged-el-nino-indias-first-heat-lounges/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "Carbon Brief"
feed_category: "environmental_news"
---

Welcome to Carbon Brief's DeBriefed. An essential guide to the week's key developments relating to climate change. This week US-China meet ENERGY TALKS: Trump administration officials have raised the prospect of China buying more US oil in response to the disruption caused by the Iran war, following two days of talks between the leaders of the superpowers in Beijing, said Reuters. On Thursday, US treasury secretary Scott Bessent told CNBC the nations had discussed China 'buying more US energy', adding that production from Alaska would be a 'natural' ⁠for China. The Hong Kong-based South China Morning Post reported that Trump and Xi also agreed that the strait of Hormuz must remain open to 'support the free flow of energy'. CLIMATE 'COOPERATION': Ahead of the talks, the Communist party-affiliated People's Daily published an article saying that addressing climate change requires 'coordinated efforts and cooperation' between China and the US. State-run newspaper China Daily said that US-China cooperation on energy security and climate governance is 'essential' because the two countries have 'considerable influence over international institutions'. However, an article in Legal Planet said that the Trump-Xi meeting had no climate agenda, adding that the two countries are now moving in 'radically different directions'. El Niño extremes 'SUPERCHARGED': From wildfires to heatwaves and flooding, scientists have warned that the El Niño weather pattern could 'amplify climate extremes' in 2026, reported Climate Home News. There is an 82% chance of a 'very strong' El Niño forming this year, according to the average of four weather forecasters cited by the Times. The Independent added that the phenomenon could be 'supercharged' by another weather pattern – a positive Indian Ocean Dipole – raising the risks of fire, drought risks and other extreme weather events. WORLD ON FIRE: Global fire outbreaks hit a 'record high' in Africa, Asia and elsewhere this year, reported Reuters, with conditions expected to worsen to the 'highest in recent history' if a strong El Niño 'kicks in'. More than 150m hectares of land were damaged by fires from January to April – 20% more than the previous record – according to data compiled by the ​World Weather Attribution (WWA) research group cited by the newswire. Around the world ETHIOPIA EVS: Electric vehicles now account for 8% of Ethiopia's car fleet as 'soaring prices and fuel shortages compel' African countries to switch to 'cleaner and cheaper transport', according to the Associated Press. UK AID CUT: The UK has halved its most recent contribution to the UN's Green Climate Fund (GCF) as part of a government 'shift from development aid to military spending', according to Climate Home News. The UK is no longer the top donor to the GCF following the move, said Carbon Brief. TORT RETORT: Reuters reported that the New Zealand government plans to amend a key climate law, to prevent courts from holding private companies liable for climate harms. This would apply to 'both current and future proceedings', the newswire said, including a current case against six major emitters. RENEWABLE SECURITY: Military alliance NATO is 'openly backing renewables and other non-fossil fuel sources of energy as key to the alliance's security' despite US scepticism, reported Politico. The outlet covered a NATO-backed study that highlighted how imported fuels have been used as a 'bargaining chip' in conflicts. NO INDIAN 'LOCKDOWN': India's oil-and-gas minister 'dismissed concerns of any imminent lockdown-like restrictions' after prime minister Narendra Modi 'urged citizens' to adopt fuel-saving measures amid a global energy crisis, reported the Economic Times. One billion barrels The volume of oil the world has lost over the past two months since Iran began its blockade of the strait of Hormuz following attacks by the US and Israel, according to Saudi Aramco CEO Amin Nasser, quoted in Reuters. Latest climate research Antarctic sea ice levels have plummeted to 'record-low anomalies' since 2015, with researchers calling it 'one of the largest present-day climatic shifts in the Earth system' | Science Advances Rainfall reductions in the southern Amazon will occur at progressively lower levels of deforestation as the planet warms, indicating that 'climate change amplifies the sensitivity of rainfall to forest loss' | Global Ecology and Biogeography Economic inequality adds more than 100,000 deaths to the total toll from heat and cold in Europe | Nature Health (For more, see Carbon Brief's in-depth daily summaries of the top climate news stories on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday.) Captured Contrary to claims by the UK car industry that demand is not high enough to meet the UK government's sales targets for 'zero emissions vehicles' (ZEVs), a new Carbon Brief factcheck found it has actually 'overcomplied' with its mandate. The chart above shows the required (left) and achieved (right) share of ZEVs in total UK car sales in 2024, the latest figures available. 'Flexibilities' (in light blue) include the sale of lower-emission petrol cars. Spotlight Chennai's gig workers race against the heat This week, Carbon Brief visits one of India's first air-conditioned lounges designed to help gig workers deal with extreme heat. An air-conditioned lounge for gig workers in Chennai's T Nagar shopping district. Credit: Ishan Tankha / Scorched On a single day in late April, 20 of the world's hottest cities were all in India. Chennai was not on the list this time, but is no stranger to high temperatures. In the south-eastern coastal capital of Tamil Nadu, extreme humidity and heat are inescapable facts of life. 'The heat is by no means manageable, but we have no choice but to deal with it,' said Mohammed S, a 29-year-old grocery platform delivery worker, speaking to Carbon Brief. Last year, Chennai became India's first ever city to roll out air-conditioned lounges for millions of gig workers, like Mohammed, navigating India's increasingly hotter cities. Lounge access In the dense shopping district of T Nagar – recognised as an 'urban heat island' – studded with silk sari and jewellery shops, an unassuming oblong container-like structure stands out. Gig workers leave their slippers outside the lounge. Credit: Ishan Tankha / Scorched Through the building's tinted windows, workers wearing synthetic jerseys emblazoned with food delivery app logos are stretched out on wooden benches meant to seat 25 people. The lounge has charging points for phones, a water cooler and a unisex toilet. It might not seem like much, but workers tell Carbon Brief that it has made a 'huge difference' to their lives – even on a day when the air conditioner stopped working. 'Before this, life was very difficult,' said Mohammed. He continued: 'We would park our [electric] bikes and try to find a tree to sleep under, stop for tea and tea shop owners would tell us we couldn't sit there for more than 10 minutes, try to rest in a building's stairwell and be chased away, then try to find shade under a flyover. Now we can sit in the AC and avoid the worst of the heat.' Dinesh, 27, said his day starts at dawn before the sun is up, picking up packages from companies in north Chennai – another critical heat hotspot. For the next seven hours, there is no 'off point' or breaks for Dinesh as apps rush deliveries. Some of Chennai's gig workers told Carbon Brief they try to avoid the worst of afternoon temperatures from noon to 3pm, but for many – especially migrant workers – sitting back in the lounge is not a choice they can afford. One of them explained: 'If you don't have cash to cover your bills or have to send money back home, you head out into the heat for a 12-hour shift and hope for the best.' Dinesh checks his orders in the gig worker's lounge. Credit: Ishan Tankha / Scorched Feeling 'gear' In Chennai, heat might be normalised, but it has its own vocabulary. Speaking to Carbon Brief, the city's gig workers, auto rickshaw drivers and fish sellers used an all-encompassing term – 'gear' – to describe their symptoms, including dizziness, exhaustion and nausea. Last summer, researchers offered Delhi's gig workers a Rs 200 (roughly £2) cash transfer on the first day of a heatwave, to provide them with a means to achieve 'real-time' adaptation to heat risk. Workers who received a cash transfer reported fewer heat-related symptoms, according to the study. Asked if they would accept similar incentives to stay home on 40C days, workers in the T Nagar lounge expressed disbelief. Dinesh – who also trains technicians on how to repair air conditioners to support his income – told Carbon Brief: 'They [the apps] offer us incentives to go out in the heat when there are fewer riders.' Barring a few, none of the dozens of outdoor workers Carbon Brief spoke to had an air conditioner at home or in their hostels, making the lounge the only place they could cool down. Watch, read, listen THE BIG 'LOSER': Writing in Foreign Affairs, Princeton University's Prof Benjamin Bardlow argued that Beijing 'may emerge from the war in Iran as its winner – and Washington its ultimate loser'. CARBON 'KINGPIN': A new podcast by Drilled followed Bruce Rastetter – a corn ethanol 'kingpin-turned-carbon entrepreneur' from Iowa – now promoting biofuels and carbon-capture projects in Brazil.OPEC 'DRAMA KINGS': An episode of the Polycrisis podcast, titled 'Gulf drama kings', dug into the UAE's announcement that it was quitting oil producers' cartel OPEC, asking whether this reflected 'doom' for the group, geopolitical tensions, or 'different beliefs' about the future of oil. Coming up 17 May: Cape Verde election 17-22 May: 13th session of the World Urban Forum, Baku, Azerbaijan 20-21 May:Copenhagen climate ministerial Pick of the jobs Greenpeace, communications and engagement co-head (climate) | Salary: £63,756-£67,644. Location: London Global Witness, deputy director of campaigns (one-year contract) | Salary: £75,886. Location: London Karolinska Institute, research assistant in climate attribution and health | Salary: Unknown. Location: Stockholm, Sweden Greenpeace South Asia, climate researcher | Salary: Unknown. Location: Colombo, Sri Lanka DeBriefed is edited by Daisy Dunne. Please send any tips or feedback to debriefed@carbonbrief.org. This is an online version of Carbon Brief's weekly DeBriefed email newsletter. Subscribe for free here. DeBriefed 8 May 2026: EU eyes fossil-fuel exemptions | Wind and solar save UK '£1.7bn' | Amazon 'tipping point' DeBriefed | 08.05.26 DeBriefed 1 May 2026: Countries chart path away from fossil fuels | China's clean-tech surge | Global forest loss slows DeBriefed | 01.05.26 DeBriefed 24 April 2026: Europe's energy-crisis plan | Renewables overtake coal | Colombia's fossil-fuel summit DeBriefed | 24.04.26 DeBriefed 17 April 2026: Fossil-fuel power slumps | 'Super' El Niño warning | Afghanistan's climate struggle DeBriefed | 17.04.26 The post DeBriefed 15 April 2026: Trump-Xi talk energy | 'Supercharged' El Niño | India's first 'heat lounges' appeared first on Carbon Brief.

[Read original article](https://www.carbonbrief.org/debriefed-15-april-2026-trump-xi-talk-energy-supercharged-el-nino-indias-first-heat-lounges/)
