---
layout: feed_item
title: "NASA's SPHEREx Mission Maps Water Ice Throughout Cygnus X"
date: 2026-04-15 15:04:38 +0000
categories: [climate_science]
tags: ['california', 'year-2026', 'usa']
keywords: ['mission', 'california', 'nasa', 'year-2026', 'spherex', 'usa']
description: "3 Min Read NASA's SPHEREx Mission Maps Water Ice Throughout Cygnus X PIA26748 Credits: NASA/JPL-Caltech/IPAC/Hora et al"
external_url: https://science.nasa.gov/photojournal/nasas-spherex-mission-maps-water-ice-throughout-cygnus-x/
is_feed: true
source_feed: "NASA Science"
feed_category: "climate_science"
---

3 Min Read NASA's SPHEREx Mission Maps Water Ice Throughout Cygnus X PIA26748 Credits: NASA/JPL-Caltech/IPAC/Hora et al. Photojournal NavigationSciencePhotojournalNASA's SPHEREx Mission Maps…Photojournal HomePhotojournal SearchLatest ContentGalleriesFeedbackRSSAbout Downloads NASA's SPHEREx Mission Maps Water Ice Throughout Cygnus X JPEG (1.99 MB) PIA26748 Figure A JPEG (6.64 MB) Description An observation made by NASA's SPHEREx (Spectro-Photometer for the History of the Universe, Epoch of Reionization, and Ices Explorer) shows the chemical signatures of water ice (shown in bright blue) and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (orange) in Cygnus X, one of the most active and turbulent regions of star birth in our Milky Way galaxy. One of several maps of molecular clouds made by SPHEREx, this observation is detailed in a study published April 15, 2026, in The Astrophysical Journal. The study supports the hypothesis that interstellar ice forms on the surface of tiny dust particles no larger than particles found in the smoke from a candle. The findings show the densest regions of ice coincide with the densest regions of dust, and the dust shields the ice from the intense ultraviolet radiation emitted by newborn stars. Figure A Figure A shows the same region, but in three different wavelengths assigned the colors green, blue, and red. This SPHEREx observation highlights the dark, dusty lanes that protect the water molecules from the intense radiation generated by newborn stars. Although space telescopes such as NASA's James Webb Space Telescope and the agency's retired Spitzer have detected water, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, and other icy molecules throughout our galaxy, the SPHEREx observatory is the first infrared mission specifically designed to find such molecules over the entire sky, via the mission's large-scale spectral survey. Managed by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Southern California, the SPHEREx observatory launchedMarch 11, 2025, and has the unique ability to see the sky in 102 colors, each representing a different wavelength of infrared light that offers distinctive information about galaxies, stars, planet-forming regions, and other cosmic features. By late 2025, SPHEREx had completed the first of four all-sky infrared maps of the universe, charting the positions of hundreds of millions of galaxies in 3D to help answer major questions about the cosmos, including those about the origins of water and life. The mission is managed by JPL for the agency's Astrophysics Division within the Science Mission Directorate in Washington. The telescope and the spacecraft bus were built by BAE Systems in Boulder, Colorado. The science analysis of the SPHEREx data is being conducted by a team of scientists at 13 institutions across the U.S. and in South Korea and Taiwan, led by Principal Investigator Jamie Bock, who is based at Caltech with a joint JPL appointment, and by JPL Project Scientist Olivier Doré. Data is processed and archived at IPAC at Caltech in Pasadena, which manages JPL for NASA. The SPHEREx dataset is freely available to scientists and the public. For more information about the SPHEREx mission visit: https://science.nasa.gov/mission/spherex/ Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From Photojournal Photojournal Search Photojournal Photojournal's Latest Content Feedback The post NASA's SPHEREx Mission Maps Water Ice Throughout Cygnus X appeared first on NASA Science.

[Read original article](https://science.nasa.gov/photojournal/nasas-spherex-mission-maps-water-ice-throughout-cygnus-x/)
