---
layout: feed_item
title: "oPt: Attacks on Gaza over Eid kill 26, as Israeli forces push deeper into the strip"
date: 2026-05-29 15:34:15 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['year-2023', 'public-health', 'climate-health']
keywords: ['over', 'year-2023', 'attacks', 'public-health', 'gaza', 'climate-health']
description: "Country: occupied Palestinian territory Source: UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights Please refer to the attached files"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/occupied-palestinian-territory/attacks-gaza-over-eid-kill-26-israeli-forces-push-deeper-strip
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: occupied Palestinian territory Source: UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights Please refer to the attached files. UN Human Rights in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (OHCHR OPT) condemns the increase in Israeli attacks in Gaza since the eve of Eid Al Adha on Tuesday, 26 May. At least 26 Palestinians were killed since Tuesday including six women and seven children as Palestinian families prepared to observe Eid amid displacement, deprivation, and insecurity. Three airstrikes on 26 May killed 12 Palestinians. In the early morning hours, one more 14-year-old girl died of injuries sustained in an Israeli airstrike the day before that also killed a 30-year-old woman and a five-year-old girl according to initial information. Since the announcement of a ceasefire, at least 32 children and eight women have been killed in Israeli attacks in which fatalities were exclusively women and children. One of the airstrikes on 26 May killed four men in eastern Al Maghazi camp, Middle Gaza, reportedly after they resisted attempts to search their homes by armed gangs allegedly supported by the Israeli military. Another airstrike hit a car in Al Mawasi, Khan Younis, killing two men. The third airstrike struck an apartment in Al Rimal, Gaza City, and killed a newly appointed commander of Hamas's Al Qassam Brigades together with his wife, his two sons, aged 15 and 22, his daughter, aged 9, and a woman passerby. On the first day of Eid Al Adha, 27 May, an Israeli airstrike in central Gaza City reportedly killed at least ten: four girls, one boy, three women, and two men allegedly affiliated with Al Qassam Brigades. Since the announcement of a ceasefire, Israeli forces have killed 922 Palestinians in attacks across Gaza, bringing the total death toll since 7 October 2023 to nearly 73,000. OHCHR OPT has consistently warned that Israel's attacks in Gaza violate international humanitarian law's principles of distinction, proportionality, and precaution in attacks. A recent OHCHR OPT report also concluded that the totality of Israeli conduct in Gaza raises serious concerns about Israel's compliance with its obligations to prevent acts prohibited under the Genocide Convention. The Israeli blockade on Gaza is also still depriving Palestinians of necessities, including adequate shelter, essential medicines, and food items. Almost everyone is displaced and concentrated into less than half the land area of Gaza— hemmed in by Israeli ground forces that continue to move west, displacing families and pushing them into a progressively narrower strip of land. In recent days, multiple displacement orders were issued, forcing people out of their shelters. The Israeli Prime Minister announced yesterday that he had directed Israeli forces to expand their deployment to cover 70 per cent of Gaza. The continued contraction of areas available to civilians raises grave concerns about access to humanitarian assistance, and the ability of displaced families to find any meaningful safety. 'Our concerns about the commission of war crimes in Gaza have not stopped,' said Ajith Sunghay, Head of UN Human Rights in the Occupied Palestinian Territory. 'It is difficult enough to navigate life in chronic displacement in the ruins of Gaza, under blockade, and after Israeli attacks virtually destroyed every essential system: healthcare, education, food production, law enforcement and civil order. Continuing military attacks on a population living under these conditions is unthinkable.' ENDS For more information and media requests, please contact: Mayy El Sheikh – mayy.elsheikh@un.org Tag and share Twitter @OHCHR_Palestine Facebook UN Human Rights Palestine

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/occupied-palestinian-territory/attacks-gaza-over-eid-kill-26-israeli-forces-push-deeper-strip)
