---
layout: feed_item
title: "WORLD ENVIRONMENT DAY: Salesian Missions highlights projects that address climate action in local communities"
date: 2026-06-09 14:18:50 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['california', 'renewable-energy', 'urgent', 'clean-energy', 'climate-costs', 'year-2026', 'economic-impacts', 'public-health', 'usa', 'climate-health']
keywords: ['california', 'renewable-energy', 'salesian', 'urgent', 'clean-energy', 'climate-costs', 'environment', 'world']
description: "NEW ROCHELLE, NY (June 5, 2026) Salesian Missions, the U"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/world/world-environment-day-salesian-missions-highlights-projects-address-climate-action-local-communities
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Countries: World, Guatemala, Peru, Uganda, Zambia Source: Salesian Missions Salesian organizations around globe focus on environmentally friendly activities, education. NEW ROCHELLE, NY (June 5, 2026) Salesian Missions, the U.S. development arm of the Salesians of Don Bosco, joins humanitarian organizations and the international community in celebrating World Environment Day held annually on June 5. The theme for the day is 'A Global Call for Climate Action' and calls for the world to rally around the urgency of climate action. The World Environment Day website noted, 'With rising temperatures, collapsing ecosystems and disruptive weather extremes, humanity stands at a tipping point. But we are not powerless. The 2026 theme underscores that climate action is not just about reducing carbon emissions — it is about rethinking the systems that power our economies and repairing our relationship with the climate. By doing so, we can secure a safer, healthier and more just future for all.' Salesian organizations around the globe are focused on environmentally friendly activities and education. Part of this was driven by Pope Francis' 2020 Laudato Si', which underlined the importance of education and training that will help youth foster environmental responsibility. Salesians also launched the Don Bosco Green Alliance, an international collective of youth from Salesian institutions and organizations. Membership is open to all Salesian institutions and organizations worldwide. 'Salesian missionaries are focused on environmental education and activities in schools and oratories to educate youth and protect the environment,' said Father Michael Conway, director of Salesian Missions. 'From clean-up days to tree planting to using solar power for buildings and clean water projects, Salesians are ensuring the next generation is empowered to help care for the planet.' In honor of World Environment Day, Salesian Missions is proud to highlight environmentally friendly initiatives in countries around the globe. GUATEMALA At Talita Kumi, located in San Pedro Carchá, Alta Verapaz, Guatemala, boarding students continue to implement environmental protection initiatives. One of their most recent efforts is the production of a new type of organic fertilizer through vermiculture, complementing the Bokashi compost they had already been producing. The new fertilizer is created using the Californian red worm, a hybrid of species that live in soil and those that thrive in manure and organic matter. Its primary food source includes coffee pulp — an abundant byproduct of the coffee industry in northern Guatemala, where Talita Kumi's student centers are located. A Salesian explained, 'These worms transform organic waste into humus, a nutrient-rich compost that naturally and sustainably improves soil quality. The process is carried out in wooden boxes covered with black nylon to protect the worms from direct sunlight. Beyond reducing the amount of organic waste sent to landfills, this initiative produces a high-quality fertilizer used for growing vegetables and short-cycle crops on campus, promoting sustainability and efficient use of natural resources.' These techniques are replicable by students in their communities, most of which are rural and Indigenous Q'eqchi. In doing so, the students help spread ecological farming practices rooted in respect for nature. PERU Salesian missionaries have been able to improve the learning environment for youth who are vulnerable and are studying at the Bosconia center in Piura, Peru. The project was made possible thanks to donor funding from Salesian Missions. Students and staff previously found it difficult to focus in class due to the heat at the school. With the project, two air conditioning units have been added. Salesians also added a covering around the pool to limit the sun exposure for students. Luis Angel Bregante Andrade, a 22-year-old student, was impacted by the donation. He lives in a challenging economic situation, and the area where he lives has a high poverty rate as well as high rates of crime and drug addiction. He studies at Cetpro Bosconia in the storage operations course and hopes to find a good job after graduation to help support his family. UGANDA The Salesian community in Palabek Refugee Settlement, located in Uganda, has a new solar power system thanks to donor funding by Salesian Missions. The funding enabled the successful installation of 60 high-quality solar panels, harnessing renewable energy to meet the community's electricity needs. This significantly enhances energy access for the community, including religious missionaries and residents. The upgraded system has contributed to reducing dependence on fuel-based generators, leading to noticeable savings in operational costs. The new system also advances environmental conservation efforts by utilizing renewable solar energy and decreasing the community's carbon footprint. More than 600 people from the youth center and chapel have been impacted by this donation. Before the project, chapels, youth centers, nursery schools and the community needed more electricity than the existing system could provide. The old system's capacity was insufficient to supply continuous electricity where needed. The 12 batteries could only power the area for a few hours after sunset, with some lighting lasting just three hours. To address this, the new system increased the number of batteries to 16, including high-quality lithium batteries known for their long-lasting life and resistance. The installed system now supports lighting, communication, and basic electrical needs within the residence, enhancing daily living and community activities. The improved energy infrastructure has increased the community's ability to support various programs and activities, fostering development and well-being. ZAMBIA Salesian missionaries at the Don Bosco Community in Mansa, Zambia, recently installed a solar power system thanks to donor funding from Salesian Missions. Salesians were able to install 12 solar panels, lithium batteries, and inverters, allowing the system to provide stable and consistent electricity to the main priest's house and adjacent volunteer house. Additionally, the new system ensures that nearby water pumps are powered. Zambia is currently grappling with a serious energy crisis caused primarily by its overdependence on hydropower. This energy source constitutes over 85% of the country's electricity generation capacity, but generation has dropped significantly thanks to persistent and extreme dry seasons. A Salesian explained, 'We had been using diesel generators to help when the main power supply was out, but that was both costly and unsustainable in the long term given rising fuel prices and environmental concerns. Having an alternative, reliable and clean energy source that supports the essential services carried out by the priests has been a pressing need. The installation of the solar power addresses this while also contributing to Zambia's national vision of integrating renewable energy into its development agenda.' ### About Salesian Missions Salesian Missions is headquartered in New Rochelle, NY, and is part of the Don Bosco Network—a worldwide federation of Salesian NGOs. The mission of the U.S.-based nonprofit Catholic organization is to raise funds for international programs that serve youth and families in poor communities around the globe. The Salesian missionaries are made up of priests, brothers and sisters, as well as laypeople—all dedicated to caring for poor children throughout the world in more than 130 countries and helping young people become self-sufficient by learning a trade that will help them gain employment. To date, more than 3 million youth have received services funded by Salesian Missions. These services and programs are provided to children regardless of race or religion. For more information, go to SalesianMissions.org.

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/world/world-environment-day-salesian-missions-highlights-projects-address-climate-action-local-communities)
