---
layout: feed_item
title: "Lebanon: Flash Update #20 - Escalation of hostilities in Lebanon (as of 23 April 2026)"
date: 2026-04-25 08:39:51 +0000
categories: [extreme_weather]
tags: ['year-2026', 'climate-health', 'urgent', 'public-health']
keywords: ['year-2026', 'urgent', 'public-health', 'flash', 'update', 'climate-health', 'lebanon']
description: "Country: Lebanon Source: UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Please refer to the attached file"
external_url: https://reliefweb.int/report/lebanon/lebanon-flash-update-20-escalation-hostilities-lebanon-23-april-2026
is_feed: true
source_feed: "ReliefWeb - Updates"
feed_category: "extreme_weather"
---

Country: Lebanon Source: UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Please refer to the attached file. HIGHLIGHTS Ceasefire extended for further three weeks even as population movements remain tentative and uneven. A slight 3 per cent increase in the number of displaced people in collective shelters recorded: 121,225 people as of 23 April. The protection environment remains highly fragile, with elevated risks driven by insecurity, overcrowded shelter conditions, and limited access to services. Funding of the Flash Appeal rises to 33 per cent, or US$ 102.9 million. Nearly 500,000 vulnerable, conflict-affected people have received multipurpose cash assistance. Situation Overview The humanitarian situation in Lebanon remains critical. Despite the extension of the initial 10-day ceasefire by three additional weeks, humanitarian needs remain immense and the situation on the ground highly fragile. Some one million people remain displaced across the country as conditions for safe and durable returns, unimpeded humanitarian access and the protection of civilians are not yet in place. Daily reports of shelling, demolitions and air strikes, as well as continued restrictions on civilian return beyond the so-called Yellow Line, have accompanied the fragile ceasefire. Since the start of the ceasefire, at least 195 people have been killed and 175 injured as a result of hostilities. One 22 April, a journalist was killed and two injured in an airstrike in Bint Jbeil district (Nabatieh Governorate). While the ceasefire has slowed new displacement, people remain on the move in uncertain and unpredictable ways, as many families attempting to return face damaged homes, disrupted services, and ongoing security risks. As of 23 April, 121,225 displaced people were staying in 642 collective shelters, an increase of 3 per cent since the previous report, while also reflecting a decrease of nearly 17 per cent since 16 April, before the initial 10-day ceasefire was announced. The situation is likely to remain fluid, with tentative and uneven movement patterns emerging in the coming days and weeks. The escalation has paralyzed essential services and caused widespread damage to infrastructure and basic services across southern Lebanon, including residential buildings, road networks, and other vital services. Six hospitals and 51 Primary Healthcare Centres (PHCCs) remain closed due to violence, leaving affected communities without adequate access to healthcare. More than 147 attacks on healthcare have been recorded since 2 March, resulting in 100 deaths and 233 injuries among healthcare workers on duty, albeit no new incidents have been recorded since the last report. Food prices have risen by at least 6 per cent, creating a gap in the already depleted purchasing power of people in need. Shelter capacity is strained, particularly in Beirut due to secondary displacement patterns, with IDPs moving back towards their home areas from other sites of displacement. Compounding needs are exposing many to exploitation, including through exorbitant rents, while their full return remains hindered by presence of UXOs and lack of basic services. Since mid-March, several key bridges across the Litani River have been destroyed or rendered inoperable, alongside repeated strikes on secondary bridges, access roads, fuel stations, electricity networks, water infrastructure, telecommunications assets and health facilities. While the Qasmiya bridge has been partially restored, the wider transport network remains severely degraded, limiting predictable access between areas north of the Litani River (NLR) and south of the Litani River (SLR) and constraining sustained humanitarian movements, particularly for trucks, ambulances, large-scale return or relief operations.

[Read original article](https://reliefweb.int/report/lebanon/lebanon-flash-update-20-escalation-hostilities-lebanon-23-april-2026)
